# An Economist Walks Into a Brothel: And Other Unexpected Places to Understand Risk
Author: Allison Schrager  
[Amazon](https://amzn.to/3krbde3)  
[Goodreads](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/40909433-an-economist-walks-into-a-brothel)  

>For example, like any risk scholar, I would never take a New York City crosstown bus, because travel time is totally unpredictable: it takes thirty minutes on average to cross the island of Manhattan via bus, but commutes of more than an hour or as short as fifteen minutes are possible, depending on the day or time. If I walk, it takes thirty-five minutes—every time. When I walk, I don’t have to worry about excessive traffic or lots of stops to let people on and off the bus. Walking crosstown is almost perfectly predictable, and for me takes just about as long as riding the bus. To put it in terms of financial economics: if you need to decide between two portfolios with similar returns, choose the one that is less risky.

>What is your ultimate goal? If you achieve it, what does that look like? How can you achieve your goal with no risk at all or as little risk as possible? In other words, what would guarantee you would accomplish your goal? Is that no-risk option possible or desirable? If not, how much risk do you need to take to get what you want?

>Most of us do not know anyone who will subsidize our bets. But there is a lesson to learn from Hellmuth. He gives up some of his potential winnings to avoid having too much on the line that he can lose. We can all do this by tempering the risks we take, otherwise known as hedging (explained in more detail in chapter 9). It might be balancing a stock portfolio with bonds or not taking a bigger salary instead of stock options at work. The principle is the same: when you have less at stake to lose, you stay more rational. Eliminate Extreme Downside Risk Hellmuth’s autobiography describes, in painstaking detail, every hand in every major poker game he’s been in. What sticks out to a less enthusiastic poker fan are the side deals he makes with the other players. At a crucial part of the game, he and the other player often take a break, remove their microphones, and step outside. There, they agree to split the prize money and still offer the winner some extra upside, just as he and Annie Duke did at the 2004 Tournament of Champions. Having a guaranteed payday (win or lose), in addition to being staked to begin with, helps Hellmuth stay focused; he doesn’t panic or play too aggressively, because he is not facing a big loss. In everyday life we can follow Hellmuth’s example by buying insurance. The benefits of insurance are explained in chapter 10. Hellmuth is essentially buying insurance on losing when he makes a side deal, because he’ll get a payment if he loses and a bigger payment if he wins. We can buy insurance in case our house burns down, we are robbed, or we get in a car accident. And just like Hellmuth’s strategy, it offers peace of mind because there is a smaller cost to loss.

>The lottery is just one example of when we assume better odds than we know we actually face. When we make a risky decision, the rational thing to do is to assess risk by weighting each possible outcome by the odds it will actually happen. However, the odds we actually face and the odds we assume when we make a decision often don’t match up. In the case of the lottery, we assume better odds; at other times we underestimate the odds something will happen. Crime is one example of huge risk miscalculation. People commit crimes for many different reasons—out of desperation, bad intentions powered by a thirst for violence, greed, youthful impulsiveness, and lack of legitimate opportunities to earn a living. But all criminals, from an eighteen-year-old small-time drug dealer to a fifty-five-year-old insider trader, share one common characteristic: they don’t think they will get caught, even if the odds are they probably will.

>...after September 11, 2001, many people were afraid to fly and drove more instead. Statistically, driving is more dangerous; one study estimates the post-9/11 increased fear of flying resulted in 1,600 additional traffic deaths. We all know driving is more dangerous than flying, but the image of a particularly horrific plane crash that is constantly shown on the news changes our risk calculation.

>We put a big weight on very likely or unlikely events and put almost no weight on anything that happens in between. The difference between a 0 percent and 5 percent probability feels huge because it creates possibility. The difference between 100 percent and 95 percent also feels meaningful because it creates or eliminates risk. But the difference between 50 percent and 55 percent barely factors into our decisions. The closer we get to certainty, the more we weight a probability, but mathematically, a 5 percent increase should be given equal weight no matter what.

>Risk management is how we can stack the odds in our favor. In chapter 4, risk was represented by a picture of the things we can imagine happening and how probable they are, or a probability distribution. The pictures represented risk profiles for different kinds of movies. In each picture the x-axis, or the domain, represented all the potential profit scenarios. The wider the distribution, the more risk. Risk management takes charge of your domain, so you can alter the shape that picture takes. We can do this in two different ways. Chapter 9 describes the first way: hedging. When we hedge, we give up some of our potential gains in exchange for reducing the chance of loss; in statistical terms, it cuts off the upper and lower tails of risk. The second method, explained in chapter 10, is insurance. With insurance, we pay someone else a fixed amount to take on our downside and we still keep the upside. With hedging you give up some upside in exchange for getting rid of downside. With insurance you get rid of downside risk, but the upside, or upper tail, is still all yours (minus the cost of insurance). Of course, the opportunity for no downside and the potential for unlimited upside sometimes comes at a steep cost.

>In 1975, the University of Chicago economist Sam Peltzman observed that improving car safety caused more accidents because people took more risks when driving. With power steering, antilock brakes, widespread use of seat belts, and driver-assist alerts if we are too close to another vehicle or pedestrian, cars are safer than ever, but we also drive faster. Taking a bigger risk because technology imparts a feeling of safety is known as the Peltzman effect.

>Compared with leading people into combat, it was a very different kind of risk. Weeks before taking it on, he explained the hazards of risk planning in war to me. He said, “If you try to plan for everything and think you have too much certainty, you create vulnerabilities. If you try too hard to predict everything that can happen and shift from the realm of certainty to uncertainty, you are going to build vulnerabilities into your force.” This insight is a good rule of thumb for dealing with risks not just in the military—where the limitations of risk management are apparent—but in everyday life. When we are leaving a job we are comfortable with, moving to a new city, or taking on any new challenge, we can never anticipate everything that will go wrong or right, and if we think we can, we set ourselves up for failure.