# Build Your Family Bank
Author: Emily Griffiths-Hamilton  
[Amazon](https://amzn.to/3eVRteL)  
[Goodreads](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/20893884-build-your-family-bank)  

>While times and views have changed on this issue, it is still common for many first-generation wealth creators to feel the need for control. Exercising control has defined their success in their business life, and sometimes this need for control spills over into their family lives. And when it comes to controlling the behavior of the younger generation, it might seem simplest to exert financial control through mechanisms like allowances or trust fund payments. Beguiling as these controlled handouts are to the younger generation, receiving them can lead to dependency and, from there, it is a slippery slope to entitlement. Rather, the Family Bank approach recognizes that there are exponential benefits to the Family Bank when all of its members pursue fulfilling, financially independent lives.

>Mayer Amschel Rothschild is said to have been firm in passing down two specific guidelines. The first was that the family members were to work together, and the second was to be reasonable in their profit expectations. Mayer Amschel Rothschild recognized that their Family Bank would be stronger with the five brothers, with varying strengths and weaknesses, working together as opposed to independently of one another. As history unfolded, the successors to the five brothers also had varying degrees of competencies to continue running the Family’s Bank, but working together allowed them to capitalize on their shared strengths and overcome individual weaknesses. The Rothschild family motto is “Concordia, Integritas, Industria,” which translates to “Harmony, Integrity, Industry.” This family puts individual achievement and family unity first. To that end, the family has always held a gathering at which their shared values and vision are reaffirmed. So important is the gathering to their Family Bank that it has been noted that family members who fail to attend are locked out of their Family Bank. The rest is a matter of historical record. Through solid teamwork, good governance, shared family purpose, and the recirculation of the family’s financial capital, the Rothschilds’ personal Family Bank has successfully endured for more than two hundred years.

>Teamwork Families following the Family Bank approach appreciate the fact that the family working together as a unit is more powerful than any one person can be working independently. As John L. Ward writes in Perpetuating the Family Business: 50 Lessons Learned from Long-Lasting, Successful Families in Business, the owners of a very successful family business in India were asked how the five very different siblings, all co-owners and co-CEOs, were able to work so well together. They said, “We see ourselves like the fingers on a hand. Some of us are taller and stronger than the others. Some of us are more dexterous. Some of us have more power. Some of us can’t really do much without the others. Some of us are a little smaller and less able. But try to do anything without all five fingers and you quickly discover that each finger does make a contribution.”

>Whatever a family’s lifestyle, the role the Family Bank plays in paying for it must be made clear to younger family members. Otherwise, children may grow up simply assuming that when they are adults, their lifestyle will remain the same. This assumption may lead to nasty entitlement issues. Holding regular ongoing conversations with all family members about the purpose of the Family Bank can prevent some of these legacy lifestyle children from facing a rude awakening when they realize in early adulthood that the effort, talent, abilities, or correlated earnings required to sustain such a lifestyle are no longer within their reach. For children whose families do not have surplus financial capital, there is simply no metaphorical cookie-jar available. Consequently, by late adolescence, these children are applying for their first jobs. Job seeking and employment are vital components of maturation for all young people. It teaches them, perhaps for the first time, the effort it takes to earn their own money, as well as the true value of a dollar. However, the parents of cookie-jar kids often do not treat the ability for their child to earn their own living as a priority. After all, children who hang out all summer at the cottage lose the opportunity to pursue independent work. These adolescents quickly learn that the cookie jar is full and the lid is easy to loosen. While their parents enjoy dockside relaxation at the cottage by day and party the nights away, these children are watching and learning. So, when the ski boat needs gas, or a teenager wants new board shorts, skate shoes, and some beer for that night’s party at a buddy’s cottage, no problem. These kids simply reach into the cookie jar. As these children mature, however, the postponing of their independence, including financial independence through work, is anything but a sensible idea. True happiness is realized through the ability to lead a free life, not only physically but also emotionally and financially. A cookie-jar kid, by definition, is not free; he or she is dependent on the parental supply of cookies in the cookie jar.