# Conscious
Author: Annaka Harris  
[Amazon](https://amzn.to/3zy3jUq)  
[Goodreads](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/41571759-conscious)  

>1: A Mystery Hiding in Plain Sight

>Our experience of consciousness is so intrinsic to who we are, we rarely notice that something mysterious is going on.

> Consciousness is experience itself, and it is therefore easy to miss the profound question staring us in the face in each moment: Why would any collection of matter in the universe be conscious?

>We look right past the mystery as if the existence of consciousness were obvious or an inevitable result of complex life, but when we look more closely, we find that it is one of the strangest aspects of reality.

>The moment matter becomes conscious seems at least as mysterious as the moment matter and energy sprang into existence in the first place. The mystery of consciousness rivals one of the greatest conundrums ever to bend human thought: How could something appear out of nothing?3 Likewise, how does felt experience arise out of nonsentient matter? The Australian philosopher David Chalmers famously termed this the “hard problem” of consciousness.4 Unlike the “easy problems” of explaining animal behavior or understanding which processes in the brain give rise to which functions, the hard problem lies in understanding why some of these physical processes have an experience associated with them at all.

>2: Intuitions and Illusions

>This and the previous example seem to come straight out of a horror movie, but we can imagine other, less disturbing instances in which a conscious mind might lack a mode of expression—scenarios involving artificial intelligence (AI), for example, in which an advanced system becomes conscious but has no way of convincingly communicating this to us. But one thing is certain: it’s possible for a vivid experience of consciousness to exist undetected from the outside.

Note
   These 2 examples though ('locked-in syndrome' and 'anasthesia awareness') come out of humans who are already long-proven to be conscious beings.

>3: Is Consciousness Free?

>As we go about our daily lives, we experience what appears to be a continuous stream of present-moment events, yet we actually become conscious of physical events in the world slightly after they have occurred. In fact, one of the most startling findings in neuroscience has been that consciousness is often “the last to know.” Visual, auditory, and other kinds of sensory information move through the world (and our nervous system) at different rates. The light waves and sound waves emitted the moment the tennis ball makes contact with your racket, for example, do not arrive at your eyes and ears at the same time, and the impact felt by your hand holding the racket occurs at yet another interval. To complicate matters further, the signals perceived by your hands, eyes, and ears travel different distances through your nervous system to reach your brain (your hands are a lot farther away from your brain than your ears are). Only after all the relevant input has been received by the brain do the signals get synchronized and enter your conscious experience through a process called “binding”—whereby you see, hear, and feel the ball hit the racket all in the same instant. As the neuroscientist David Eagleman puts it: Your perception of reality is the end result of fancy editing tricks: the brain hides the difference in arrival times. How? What it serves up as reality is actually a delayed version. Your brain collects up all the information from the senses before it decides upon a story of what happens. . . .

>A number of fascinating experiments have been conducted in this area, and the neuroscientist Michael Gazzaniga describes some of them in detail in a wonderful chapter aptly titled “The Brain Knows Before You Do” in his book The Mind’s Past. Some of these experiments, most famously conducted by Benjamin Libet at the University of California, San Francisco, show that your brain prepares a complex motor movement of your body before you are consciously aware of deciding to move. In such experiments, subjects watch a special clock and, according to an instrument similar to the second hand on a traditional clock, mark the exact moment they decide to move (a finger, for instance). But, using EEG, researchers can reliably detect the cortical activity signaling these impending movements about half a second before subjects feel they make the decision to move.2

>...findings about how decisions are made at the level of the brain—and the milliseconds of delay in our conscious awareness of sensory input and Zen of our own thoughts—have caused many neuroscientists, Gazzaniga included, to describe the feeling of conscious will as an illusion. Note that in such experiments, the subjects felt they were making a freely willed action that, in actuality, had already been set in motion before they felt they made the decision to move.

>It’s important to clarify that when I talk about the nature of free will in this context, I’m referring specifically to the feeling of a conscious will. I’m pointing to the fundamental, day-to-day illusion we all seem to walk around with: that we are distinct and separate “selves,” separate not only from those around us and from the outside world but even from our own bodies, as if our conscious experience somehow floats free of the material world. For example, like everyone else, I have the absurd tendency to regard “my body” (including “my head” and “my brain”) as something my conscious will inhabits—when in fact everything I think of as “me” is dependent on the functioning of my brain. Even the slightest neural changes, via intoxication, disease, or injury, could render “me” unrecognizable. Yet I can’t seem to shake the false intuition that I could even choose to leave my body (if I could only figure out how) and everything constituting “me” would somehow remain magically intact.

>The brain, as a system, does have a type of free will, however—in that it makes decisions and choices on the basis of outside information, internal goals, and complex reasoning. But when I discuss the illusion of conscious will here, I’m speaking of the illusion that consciousness is the will itself.5 The concept of a conscious will that is free seems to be incoherent—it suggests that one’s will is separate and isolated from the rest of its environment, yet paradoxically able to influence its environment by making choices within it. I was once at an event where my friend and meditation teacher Joseph Goldstein was asked if he believed we have free will. He answered the question with arresting clarity when he said that he couldn’t even figure out what the term could possibly mean. What does it mean to have a will that is free from the cause-and-effect relationships of the universe? As he gestured with his hands dancing above him in the air, trying to point to this imaginary free will, he asked, “How can we even try to picture such a will floating about?”

>Even though we are talking about modifying a conscious experience, consciousness itself isn’t necessarily controlling the system; all we know is that consciousness is experiencing the system. It is no contradiction to say that consciousness is essential to ethical concerns, yet irrelevant when it comes to will.

>It seems clear that we can’t decide what to think or feel, any more than we can decide what to see or hear. A highly complicated convergence of factors and past events—including our genes, our personal life history, our immediate environment, and the state of our brain—is responsible for each next thought. Did you decide to remember your high school band when that song started playing on the radio? Did I decide to write this book? In some sense, the answer is yes, but the “I” in question is not my conscious experience. In actuality, my brain, in conjunction with its history and the outside world, decided. I (my consciousness) simply witness decisions unfolding.

>4: Along for the Ride

>However, in my own musings, I have stumbled into what might be an interesting exception: consciousness seems to play a role in behavior when we think and talk about the mystery of consciousness. When I contemplate “what it’s like” to be something, that experience of consciousness presumably affects the subsequent processing taking place in my brain. And almost nothing I think or say when contemplating consciousness would make any sense coming from a system without it. How could an unconscious robot (or a philosophical zombie) contemplate conscious experience itself without having it in the first place?

>I don’t see how a system that isn’t conscious would ever have cause to produce these thoughts, let alone how an intelligent system would be able to make sense of them. Without ever having experienced consciousness, there’s no difference that the Zombie Chalmers could be referring to. Chalmers’s explanation for how a zombie is still conceivable in theory is that the language and concepts of consciousness could be built into the program of a zombie. A robot could certainly be programmed to describe specific processes like “seeing yellow” when it detects certain wavelengths of light, or even to talk about “feeling angry” under defined circumstances, without actually consciously seeing or feeling anything. But it seems impossible for a system to make a distinction between a conscious and unconscious experience in general without having an actual conscious experience as a reference point. When I talk about the mystery of consciousness—referring to something I can distinguish and wonder about and attribute (or not) to other entities—it seems highly unlikely that I would ever do this, let alone devote so much time to it, without feeling the experience I am referring to (for the qualitative experience is the entire subject, and without it, I can have no knowledge of it whatsoever). And when I turn these ideas over in my mind, the fact that my thoughts are about the experience of consciousness suggests that there is a feedback loop of sorts and that consciousness is affecting my brain processing. After all, my brain can think about consciousness only after experiencing it (one would presume).

>5: Who Are We?

>Imagine what your experience would be like if binding didn’t take place at all—if, when playing the piano, for instance, you first saw your finger hit the key, then heard the note, and later finally felt the key hammer down. Or imagine if the process of binding were tampered with and you found yourself running before you heard the barking of the ferocious dog. Without binding processes, you might not even feel yourself to be a self at all. Your consciousness would be more like a flow of experiences in a particular

>6: Is Consciousness Everywhere?

>Neuroscientists who study consciousness are most interested in the differences at the level of the brain between seemingly conscious and unconscious functions of the body (you’re aware of reading the words on this page at this moment, but you’re not aware of the activities of your kidneys) and conscious and unconscious states (being awake versus being in deep sleep, for example). There are a variety of hypotheses proposing that certain areas of the brain, or types of neural processing, create a conscious experience; some scientists, Francis Crick and Christof Koch among them, have even speculated that it is the frequency at which neurons fire that causes them to give rise to consciousness.12

>And even though, as mentioned earlier, Thomas Nagel’s definition of the word “consciousness” (i.e., being like something) is the most accurate way to talk about subjective experience, there are a variety of ways people use the word (the capacity for self-reflection, wakefulness, alertness, etc.), which causes additional confusion. But we can continue to pose questions about whether consciousness exists outside systems that can report back about it—we just have to do so on another level of conversation. When I am unconscious during a period of deep sleep, for instance, all we know is that the part of the system that makes up “me” has been interrupted; the continuity (and even the reality) of my experience ceases for a period because the operation of that part of the system ceases. But whether consciousness itself carries on in other areas of my brain or body while the experience of “me” is on hold is still an open question. No matter how much knowledge we gain about the workings of the brain, the question at hand is likely to remain unanswered: How deep in the universe does consciousness run? In The Conscious Mind, David Chalmers suggests that consciousness could be manifested in the functioning of something as basic as a simple technological device: As we move along the scale from fish and slugs through simple neural networks all the way to thermostats, where should consciousness wink out? . . . The thermostat seems to realize the sort of information processing in a fish or a slug stripped down to its simplest form, so perhaps it might also have the corresponding sort of phenomenology in its most stripped-down form. It makes one or two relevant distinctions on which action depends; to me, at least, it does not seem unreasonable that there might be associated distinctions in experience.17

>7: Beyond Panpsychism

>Galen Strawson makes a similar point by turning the mystery of consciousness on its head. He argues that consciousness is in fact the only thing in the universe that is not a mystery—in the sense that it is the only thing we truly understand firsthand. According to Strawson, it is matter that’s utterly mysterious, because we have no understanding of its intrinsic nature. And he has dubbed this “the hard problem of matter”: [Physics] tells us a great many facts about the mathematically describable structure of physical reality, facts that it expresses with numbers and equations . . . but it doesn’t tell us anything at all about the intrinsic nature of the stuff that fleshes out this structure. Physics is silent—perfectly and forever silent—on this question. . . . What is the fundamental stuff of physical reality, the stuff that is structured in the way physics reveals? The answer, again, is that we don’t know—except insofar as this stuff takes the form of conscious experience.2

>8: Consciousness and Time

>Leaving the mind-twisting nature of quantum mechanics aside, let’s return to the relative simplicity of our human experience in the present moment. Regardless of the actual nature of time, we know that our conscious experience doesn’t represent the sequence of events in the world accurately. We have seen that through different processes the brain binds information that arrives at our sense receptors at different times and delivers it to us as a neat, present-moment package. But we can still wonder how conscious experience itself relates to time. Paying close attention to one’s moment-to-moment experience through a concentration exercise like meditation—or simply contemplating the mystery of one’s felt experience in general—leads to many interesting questions pertaining to time: How much time does a moment of consciousness take? Is consciousness continuous or does it somehow flicker in and out (and how would we know the difference)? What is the present moment; is it some sort of illusion? Is time itself an illusion?