# Cribsheet: A Data-Driven Guide to Better, More Relaxed Parenting, From Birth to Preschool
Author: Emily Oster  
[Amazon](https://amzn.to/3wyK7UA)  
[Goodreads](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/40121328-cribsheet)  

>The First Three Days

>The major risk from circumcision, like any surgical procedure, is infection. For infant circumcisions performed in a hospital, these risks are very small. The most comprehensive estimates suggest that perhaps 1.5 percent of infant circumcisions result in minor complications, and virtually none result in serious adverse complications.4 These figures are based on studies that include some developing countries, so even the minor adverse consequences are likely to be less frequent in the US. Another risk is what is sometimes called “poor aesthetic outcome”—basically, residual foreskin that will require further surgery. There aren’t great estimates of how common this is, although it seems to be somewhat more common than the overall rate of adverse complications.5

>This covers the risks. There are also some possible benefits to circumcision. The first is the prevention of urinary tract infections (UTIs). Circumcised boys are much less likely to get these. About 1 percent of uncircumcised boys will get a UTI during childhood. For circumcised boys, the estimate is just 0.13 percent.9 This is highly significant, and it is generally accepted that this protection is real. However, it is worth saying that the benefit is small in absolute terms: you’d have to circumcise one hundred boys to prevent one UTI. Uncircumcised boys can also develop a condition called phimosis, where it becomes impossible to pull the foreskin back. This will need treatment—typically with a steroid cream—and possibly require a circumcision at an older age. The overall risk of needing a later circumcision for this condition (or related ones) is estimated at 1 to 2 percent—so, rare, but not unheard of.10 The last two cited benefits of circumcision are a lower risk of HIV and other sexually transmitted infections (STIs) and a lower risk of penile cancer. In the case of HIV and other STIs, there is good evidence from a number of countries in Africa suggesting risks are lower for circumcised men. This is in a context where most transmission of HIV is heterosexual; in the US, most transmission is through men who have sex with men (this is the technical jargon) or through IV drug use. It is unclear from the data whether the circumcision protections extend to cases of men having sex with men—they certainly do not to IV drug use.11

>The American Academy of Pediatrics suggests the health benefits of circumcision outweigh the costs, but they note correctly that both benefits and costs are quite small. This decision will often come down to personal preference, some type of cultural linkage, or just a desire to have your son’s penis look a particular way. These are all valid reasons to do it or not do it.

>Wait, You Want Me to Take It Home?

>GERM EXPOSURE There is a broad theory called the hygiene hypothesis, which states (I am paraphrasing here) that the increase in occurrences of allergies and other autoimmune illnesses over time is a result of decreased germ exposure in childhood, and that exposure to more microbes and germs as a child can help their immune system properly identify and not overreact to perceived pathogens.13 While we don’t have conclusive proof that this is true, there is some evidence backing the theory in the form of laboratory studies of particular cells and comparisons across cultures in rates of various diseases. This suggests that as your child ages—say, into toddlerhood and beyond—it is not necessarily a good idea to wipe down everything with hand sanitizer or bring your own disposable placemats to restaurants. Your kid probably shouldn’t lick the floor at the airport, as mine have occasionally done, but going a bit more in the exposure direction may be sensible.

>For these reasons, many doctors are reasonably lax about children’s germ exposure after infancy. But virtually all doctors will suggest you try to avoid exposure to illness in the baby’s first couple of months. One reason for this is simply that the smaller the child, the more vulnerable they are to serious complications. But a second reason is that for very young infants—especially those younger than twenty-eight days—medical protocols suggest much more aggressive interventions in response to illness. What does this mean? Basically, if your otherwise well-seeming six-month-old gets a fever—even a pretty high one—and you go to the doctor, they’ll probably look them over, tell you they have a virus, and send you home with instructions to give them Tylenol and fluids. In fact, many doctors’ offices will tell you not to bring this child in at all unless you are very concerned. In contrast, if your two-week-old has even a low fever, you’ll need to take them to the hospital, where they’ll be subjected to lab tests—likely including a lumbar puncture (spinal tap)—given antibiotics, and admitted as an inpatient. With very young babies, doctors have a harder time distinguishing between high- and low-risk fevers. Babies in this group are somewhat more susceptible to bacterial infections, including meningitis, which is extremely serious. Somewhere between 3 and 20 percent of infants under a month old who come to the doctor with a fever have a bacterial infection.14 These are mostly urinary tract infections, but they must be treated, and reasonably quickly.

>Breast Is Best? Breast Is Better? Breast Is About the Same?

>The study found two significant impacts: In the first year, breastfed babies had fewer gastrointestinal infections (i.e., diarrhea) and lower rates of eczema and other rashes. To put some numbers to it, 13 percent of the children of mothers in the group that wasn’t encouraged to breastfeed had at least one diarrhea episode, versus only 9 percent of those whose mothers were encouraged. The rate of rashes and eczema was also lower in the group whose mothers were encouraged to breastfeed: 3 percent versus 6 percent. These effects are significant, and as a share of the overall rates of these illnesses, they are reasonably big. For example, rashes and eczema were reduced by half. Having said that, the overall rates are worth keeping in perspective: even in the group that breastfed less, only 6 percent of children were reported to have this complication. It is also important to note that these are typically fairly minor illnesses.

>For example, a study of 70,000 Danish women published in 2016 found that breastfeeding through six months reduced the risk of an ear infection from 7 percent to 5 percent over those months.11

>The question is, really, whether breastfeeding gives children some small leg up in intelligence. If you believe studies that just compare kids who are breastfed to those who are not, you find that it does. I talked about one example of these studies on this page, and there are others. There is a clear correlation here—breastfed kids do seem to have higher IQs. But this isn’t the same as saying that breastfeeding causes the higher IQ. In reality, the causal link is much more tenuous. We can see this by looking carefully at a number of studies that compare children who were breastfed to their siblings who were not. These studies tend to find no relationship between breastfeeding and IQ. The children who were nursed did no better on IQ tests than their siblings who were not.

>In conclusion, there is no compelling evidence for smarty-boobs.

>There is one benefit that does have a larger and more robust evidence base: the link between breastfeeding and cancers, in particular breast cancer. Across a wide variety of studies and locations, there seems to be a relationship here, and a sizable one—perhaps a 20 to 30 percent reduction in the risk of breast cancer. Breast cancer is a common cancer—almost 1 in 8 women will have a form of it at some point in their lives—so this reduction is big in absolute terms. This data isn’t perfect—for one thing, the controls for maternal socioeconomic status are almost always missing—but the case for causality is bolstered by a concrete set of mechanisms. Breastfeeding changes some aspects of the cells of the breast, which makes them less susceptible to carcinogens. In addition, breastfeeding lowers estrogen production, which in turn can lower the risk of breast cancer.

>Breastfeeding: A How-To Guide

>When you drink, the alcohol level in your milk is about the same as your blood alcohol level. The baby consumes the milk, not the alcohol directly, so the level of alcohol they are exposed to is extremely low. One paper carefully calculates that even if you had four drinks very quickly and then breastfed at the maximum blood alcohol level, the baby would still be exposed to only a very, very low concentration of alcohol, one that is extremely unlikely to have any negative effects.

>Sleep Position and Location

>The first thing this graph makes clear is that both overall SIDS rates and the increased risks from co-sleeping are much larger in the presence of other risk factors—parental smoking and drinking, in particular. In the most extreme example, the predicted mortality for a bottle-fed infant with parents who both smoke and where the mother drinks more than two drinks a day is 27 deaths per 1,000 births, fully 16 times higher than the comparable infant who doesn’t share the parents’ bed. The observation that smoking, in particular, increases the risks associated with bed sharing is widely shared in other literature.14 The mechanisms for links between SIDS and smoking are not fully understood but seem to relate to the role of chemicals in secondhand smoke and their interference with infant breathing. This problem becomes more acute if the baby is closer to the smoker (even if the parent is not actively smoking).15 This graph also speaks to perhaps the more central question for many families, which is, are there still risks to co-sleeping if you do it as safely as possible—that is, if neither parent smokes or drinks a lot, and if the baby is breastfed? The data here says yes. The risk of death for infants who do not bed share in the lowest risk group is 0.08 SIDS deaths per 1,000 births. For those who bed share, it is 0.22 deaths per 1,000 births. Again, we want to put these risks into a broader context. In the US, the overall infant mortality rate is around 5 deaths per 1,000 births. This therefore represents a very small increase relative to the overall mortality rate. A perhaps more useful way to say this is that among families with no other risk factors, roughly 7,100 of them would have to avoid co-sleeping to prevent one death.

>The vast majority—up to 90 percent—of SIDS deaths occur in the first four months of life, so sleeping choices after four months are very unlikely to matter for SIDS. This also shows up in the data. The choice of sharing a room, or even sharing a bed, does not seem to affect SIDS risk after three or four months, at least for parents who are nonsmokers.24 This means there is seemingly no benefit to extending room sharing for so long. There is, however, a real cost: child sleep. In a 2017 study, researchers evaluated whether a child’s sleeping in a room with a parent made for worse sleep. They found that it did. At four months old, total sleep time was similar for babies sleeping in a parents’ room and those sleeping in their own room, but sleep was more consolidated (i.e., in longer stretches) for those in the latter group. This makes sense: their own room will be quieter. At nine months, infants who slept alone slept longer; this effect was largest for those who slept alone by four months, but also appears for babies who moved to their own room between four and nine months. Most notably, these differences were still present when the child was two and a half years old: children who slept alone by nine months slept forty-five minutes more during the night than those who were room sharing at nine months.

>The Sofa Across virtually all studies of sleep location, the one thing that jumps out as really, really risky is babies sharing a sofa with an adult. Death rates as a result of this behavior are twenty to sixty times higher than the baseline risk. It is not difficult to see why: an exhausted adult falls asleep holding an infant on a cushiony sofa, and it is easy for the infant to be smothered by a pillow. The unfortunate thing is that in at least some of these sofa deaths, the parent involved is trying to avoid the risks associated with bed sharing. They hope that if they sit up, they will stay awake, and then they fall asleep by accident. Even with the small risks of bed sharing, you’d be much better off sharing a bed than accidentally co-sleeping on a sofa.

>In terms of risks, there are two central parts of the no-stuff-in-the-crib recommendation. One is that infants should not have blankets. This conclusion is based on the results of a number of the studies discussed previously. Infants who die of SIDS are more likely to be found with blankets over their heads than control infants. The infant-clothing industry has come up with a solution to this, which is the “wearable blanket”—basically, a zipped-up bag you put your child in. Since there is no real reason to have another kind of blanket, this recommendation seems like a reasonable one to follow. The second part of the recommendation regards crib bumpers, which are forbidden by the AAP. In fact, some cities (Chicago, for example) have disallowed the sale of bumpers. The concern is that these can cause suffocation. This recommendation is slightly more complicated since, in fact, there is a purpose for bumpers in the first place: without them, your child can get their arms and legs stuck between the crib rails. This is unlikely to be life-threatening, but can certainly hurt the baby. It is useful to think about the magnitude of the bumper risk. A 2016 paper in the Journal of Pediatrics counted all the US deaths attributed to bumpers between 1985 and 2012.25 They found forty-eight. To put this in context, during this period there were about 108 million children born in the US and somewhere in the range of 650,000 total infant deaths. Eliminating bumpers in this period would therefore be expected to lower the risk of death by about 0.007 percent, preventing 1 in 13,500 deaths. By contrast, estimates suggest the “Back to Sleep” campaign reduced death risk by about 8 percent—preventing about 1 in 13 deaths. In other words, eliminating bumpers would have, at most, a very, very small effect on risk.

>Vaccination: Yes, Please

>There are a number of big studies of this relationship. The largest of them includes 537,000 children—all the children born in Denmark from 1991 to 1998. In the Danish data, the authors were able to link vaccination information to later diagnosis of autism or autism-spectrum disorders. They found no evidence that vaccinated children are more likely to be autistic; if anything, the results suggest vaccinated children are less likely to be diagnosed with autism.9

>Sleep Training

>DOES IT WORK? Good news: yes, this method works for improving sleep. There are many, many studies on this, employing a variety of related procedures (many of these are randomized trials). A 2006 review covered nineteen studies of the unfortunately named “Extinction” method—the form of “cry it out” in which you leave and do not return—of which seventeen showed improvements in sleep.3 Another fourteen studies used “Graduated Extinction”—where you come in to check on the baby at increasingly lengthy intervals—and all showed improvements. A smaller number of studies covered “Extinction with Parental Presence”—in which you stay in the room but let the child cry—and these also showed positive effects. These effects persist through six months or a year in studies that can look this far out. This means that children who are sleep trained are sleeping better (on average) even a year after the training.

>Beyond the Boobs: Introducing Solid Food

>Beyond the Boobs: Introducing Solid Food Gideon Lack is a researcher at King’s College London. He studies allergies in kids, especially allergies to peanuts. At some point, perhaps through discussions with colleagues in Israel, Dr. Lack got the impression that peanut allergies were much less common among children in Israel than in the UK.

>The researchers finally published their findings in 2015 in the New England Journal of Medicine.2 The results—I put them in a graph on this page—are striking. Children who were exposed to peanuts were far less likely to be allergic to them at the age of five than children who were not. In the group that didn’t get peanuts, 17 percent of children were allergic to peanuts at age five. (Remember, this figure is higher than it would be in the general population because of the way the researchers selected their sample.) However, only 3 percent of the children who were given peanuts were allergic.

>The primary finding relates to how parents talk about the new food. Kids are more likely to try to eat it with what researchers call “autonomy-supportive prompts”—things like “Try your hot dog” or “Prunes are like big raisins, so you might like them.” In contrast, they are less likely to try things if parents use “coercive-controlling prompts”—things like “If you finish your pasta, you can have ice cream” or “If you won’t eat, I’m taking away your iPad!!”

>Other studies show that parental pressure to try new foods or to eat in general is associated with more food refusal, not less.13 These studies also show that food refusals are more common in families where parents offer an alternative. That is, if your kid doesn’t eat broccoli and then you offer him chicken nuggets instead, he may learn that this is always the reward for not eating new foods. This problem is exacerbated by parents’ concern that their child isn’t eating enough (which, see above, is probably not true). Putting this together leads to some general advice: offer your very young child a wide variety of foods, and keep offering them even if the child rejects them at first. As they get a little older, do not freak out if they don’t eat as much as you expect, and keep offering them new and varied foods. If they won’t eat the new foods, don’t replace the foods with something else that they do like or will eat. And don’t use threats or rewards to coerce them to eat. This advice is easy to give but it can be hard to take. It is frustrating to sit at a meal that you know to be delicious with a four-year-old who screams that they hate it and will not eat anything. I don’t have a great solution for this, other than earplugs. I also tried to train Finn to say “I don’t care for pot roast” rather than “I HATE POT ROAST,” since it at least sounds more polite, even if still combined with pushing the plate away and putting on an angry pouty face. (Parenting: It’s a long game.)

>On the first question, the answer is probably yes. The vast majority of allergies result from eight food types: milk, peanuts, eggs, soy, wheat, tree nuts, fish, and shellfish. The incidence of these allergies has grown over time, perhaps as a result of better hygiene (so less allergen exposure early on), and clearly due in part to a lack of early introduction. Milk, eggs, and peanuts make up a large share even of these. We covered the peanut evidence earlier. Other research suggests a similar mechanism is at work for eggs and milk.14 The evidence on milk isn’t as convincing as the other two, but perhaps only because large studies have not yet been released. All this points to the possible importance of introducing all these allergens early—probably as early as four months. (Milk can be introduced in the form of yogurt or cheese.) Importantly, although the language here is about “introduction,” these studies include regular exposure as well. It is not enough to have your kid try peanut butter or eggs. You need to actually keep giving it to them regularly. Which leads to the question: How? This is a setting in which going slowly is a good idea. Try a little bit at first—only one allergenic food in a given day—and see how they react. If nothing, give them a little bit more. And so on until you get up to a normal amount. And then keep these foods in the rotation. This is a lot, especially since most babies don’t really eat much food anyway. To consistently expose them to peanuts and yogurt and eggs on top of everything else (what about the peas?) requires some logistical work. If you are daunted, and especially if you’re very concerned about these issues, there are some (new) products that contain powdered forms of these foods and are meant to be mixed with breast milk, formula, or cereals.

>Early Walking, Late Walking: Physical Milestones

>ILLNESS Although not technically a milestone, baby’s first cold is definitely a moment for a parent. A bad one. Then there is baby’s second cold, baby’s third cold, and on and on. As the parent of a young child, you will spend the period from October to April drowning in a lake of snot. To many of us, it may seem that our child has a cold, or possibly some other illness, literally all the time. If you have two children or, god forbid, more than two, the winter months are a haze of repeated illnesses: you, kid 1, kid 2, your partner, back to kid 2, now kid 1 again. Usually there’s a dose of stomach flu somewhere in the middle (you all get that, obviously). This can naturally leave you wondering, Is this normal? Is everyone else spending their life savings on tissues with lotion, too? Basically, yes. Kids younger than school age get an average of six to eight colds a year, most of them between September and April.7 This works out to about one a month. These colds last on average fourteen days.8 A month is thirty days. So in the winter, on average, your kid will have a cold 50 percent of the time. On top of this, most kids end their cold with a cough that can last additional weeks. It adds up. Most colds are minor, although they increase the risk of ear infection and other prolonged bacterial infections (bronchitis, walking pneumonia), which is why most doctors will tell you to come in if you are concerned, or if a fever lasts longer than a couple of days, or if your child gets worse after they’ve seemed to get better. Of these complications, ear infections are the most common. About a quarter of kids will have an ear infection by the age of one, and 60 percent by the age of four.9

>Baby Einstein vs. The TV Habit

>Finally, our intuitions should be informed by the economic idea of “opportunity cost of time.” If a child is watching TV, they are not doing something else. Depending on what that “something else” is, TV watching may be better or worse. Many studies of this emphasize that (for example) your kid can learn letters or vocabulary from Sesame Street, but they are better at learning those things from you. That’s almost certainly true, but it is less obvious to me that this is the alternative. Many parents use TV to take a break, get their breath, make a meal, do some laundry. If the alternative to an hour of TV is a frantic and unhappy parent yelling at their kid for an hour, there is good reason to think the TV might actually be better.

>Potty Training: Stickers vs. M&M’s

>The authors suggest that if what you care about is when potty training is done, there is not much point to starting before twenty-seven months or so. But it is the case that after this, starting earlier does generally mean finishing earlier. If you start training at twenty-seven or twenty-eight months, you can expect to be done by around age three, but it will take ten months to do it. If you start at age three, you finish later, but it’ll likely take you less than six months to fully train.

>Toddler Discipline

>Toddler Discipline When I misbehaved as a small child, my mother’s solution was to ask me to “sit on the stairs and think about it.” I would toddle off to the stairs, sit for a while and contemplate my wrongs, and then return to explain what I did wrong and that I would not do it again. My mother congratulated herself on being an amazing parent who was deeply in touch with her child and didn’t need to resort to the kind of “Go to your room!” discipline that others practiced. Then my brother, Stephen, arrived. He did not want to sit on the stairs and think about it when he misbehaved. In fact, he loudly refused. Things escalated to his being sent to his room. Also refused. My mother found herself physically carrying him to his room, shutting the door, and holding the door closed with all her strength while he screamed and tried to get out. Which goes to show, again, that parenting is much more about the child than about the parent. (Sidenote: Stephen is a wonderful and successful adult who was and remains a great brother.)

>The constant experimentation can be exhausting and confusing, especially as your kid gets to the point where it is harder to physically restrain them. When your son insists on repeatedly taking his shirt off in a museum, what do you do? Do you physically put the shirt back on? Do you just give up and let him run around without a shirt? (Why does he want to take the shirt off anyway? He repeatedly emphasized his intense desire to wear that very shirt in the morning.) The somewhat good news is that there are evidence-based approaches to dealing with discipline. I say “somewhat good” since there is no magic bullet that will completely stop tantrums and turn your two-year-old into a seven-year-old. Instead, parenting interventions focus on how to respond to bad behavior when it starts and limit recurrence. Before even getting into evidence, though, it’s worth stepping back and thinking about why we want to discipline our kids. What are we trying to accomplish? I think the answer is the same as what we are trying to do with all our other parenting choices: we are trying to raise happy, nice, productive adults. When my kid refuses to clean up a mess and I discipline that behavior, it is not really that I want some help cleaning up. Actually, it would be faster to clean up myself than get her to do it. It’s more that I’m trying to teach her to be someone who takes responsibility for her messes, both the LEGO messes now and the inevitable non-LEGO messes she’ll create in the future. This is the discipline-as-education philosophy espoused by French parenting (thanks, Bringing Up Bébé!). Discipline is not the same as punishment. Yes, there is a punishment component. But it’s in the service of raising better humans, not punishment for its own sake. With this scaffolding, we can turn to the data. There are a number of evidence-based parenting interventions. These include 1-2-3 Magic, the Incredible Years, Triple P—Positive Parenting Program, and so on. Many schools—including those that have children with serious behavioral issues—use a similar program called Positive Behavior Interventions and Supports, which has a similar set of goals and structures. Broadly, all these emphasize a few key elements. First, recognize that children are not adults, and you usually cannot improve their behavior with a discussion. If your four-year-old is taking their shirt off in the museum, they will not respond to a reasoned discussion about how you actually do need to wear a shirt in public places. The flip side of this—more important—is that you shouldn’t expect them to respond to adult reasoning. And as a result, you should not get angry the way you would if, say, your spouse was stripping in the museum and didn’t stop after you explained why they shouldn’t. All these interventions emphasize not getting angry. Don’t yell, don’t escalate, and definitely don’t hit. Controlling parental anger is the first central part of the intervention. This is so easy to say, but it is often so hard to do. It takes practice on your part. Most of us do not want to get angry with our kids, but we have all found ourselves furious in various moments. Toddler discipline is, really, parental discipline. Breathe. Take a second. I once told my children, “I’m so mad right now, I’m going to the bathroom for a while to calm down.” (It’s the only door in the house that locks.) And I did, only coming out when I thought I could handle not only them, but myself. An extension of this your-child-is-not-an-adult observation is that it is probably not a good use of your time to think a lot about why your small child is having a tantrum. There is a strong temptation to try to figure out what exactly is the issue—to try to get them to articulate the precise problems they are having. Even if they can talk, this is likely to be fruitless, since they probably do not know. Tantrums happen for all kinds of reasons. Working on disciplining the tantrum behavior is the goal. If they do not think of a tantrum as a way to react, they can work on developing other, more productive ways to communicate their problems. Second, these approaches all emphasize setting up a clear system of rewards and punishments and following through on them every time. For example, 1-2-3 Magic develops a system of counting (to three, obviously) in the face of disruptive behavior, and if three is reached, there is a defined consequence (a time-out, loss of a privilege, etc.). Finally, there is a strong emphasis on consistency. Whatever the system you use, use it every time. If the consequence of counting to three is a time-out, then there needs to be a time-out every time, including, say, in the grocery store. (The book suggests you find a corner of the store, or bring a “time-out mat” with you.) As an extension, if you say no to something, you stick to no. If your kid asks for dessert and you say no, you cannot then later say yes if they whine for long enough. This basically makes sense—what do they learn from that? That whining will sometimes work. Let’s do more of it! And similarly, do not make threats you cannot carry out. Let’s say you are on an airplane and your child keeps kicking the seat in front of them. Telling them, “If you do that one more time, I’m going to leave you on the airplane” is not a good threat. Why? Because you are not going to leave them on the airplane. When they then kick again to test this, and they find they are not, in fact, left on the airplane, they’ll file this away for later. The same logic goes for the common parent car trip threat, “I’m going to turn this car around if you kids do not stop fighting!” Fine to say this, but you’d better be prepared to turn around. These are the broad parameters. Like sleep training, the specifics differ across programs. If you are hoping to use this kind of discipline, you’ll probably want to pick a particular program and stick to it. One may not be better than the other, but given the importance of consistency, it is necessary to adopt one approach among everyone who is with your kid, not five similar but not identical approaches. These approaches are helpful through older ages, but can be used as early as two. The books have some specific guidelines for time-outs—for example, they should be shorter at younger ages and do not start until after a tantrum has ended. And they do outline some key components that are useful for very small children. For example, do not let your child use a tantrum to get what they want. The evidence that these work is based on a number of randomized controlled trials. To give an example, a paper published in 2003 in the Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry reported on an evaluation of 1-2-3 Magic among 222 families.1 All the parents involved were looking for help managing their children’s behavior, although none of the children had clinical behavior problems. That is to say, they were just engaging in the standard difficult behaviors. The intervention was fairly light—parents attended three two-hour meetings that discussed the 1-2-3 Magic approach, and were shown videos and given handouts about particular problem issues. There was a fourth two-hour meeting a month later to reinforce. The experimental group—the one that got the intervention—had improvements on all the variables measured. The parents scored better on measures of parenting—i.e., “Are you hostile and angry toward your child?”—and the children scored better on a variety of measures of behavior. Moreover, the parents reported that their children were better behaved and more compliant, and that their own stress had gone down. The authors noted the effect sizes were not enormous—it would be hard to expect huge effects, given how limited the intervention was—but they were large enough for parents to notice them and affect their time with their children. Smaller trials of 1-2-3 Magic with longer follow-ups have shown similar impacts, with authors arguing that the effects of these programs can be seen even two years later.2 The evidence isn’t limited to 1-2-3 Magic. A number of studies—especially in the UK and Ireland—have seen similar impacts with the Incredible Years approach. The results there show improvements in parenting practices, reductions in child behavior problems, and lower parental stress.3 Reviews that pull together evidence on all programs of this type show similarly consistent findings across studies. The bottom line is, they just seem to work.4 So, okay, these approaches work. But should you use one? One answer to this is that it depends on the alternative. I’ll talk about spanking in a bit, but the evidence suggests that it has negative consequences in both the short and long term. So if hitting is the alternative, then one of these programs is probably worth a try. And if you are tired and frustrated and feel you don’t like your kid very much, then, well, that’s also a reason to try. In this way, these programs are not unlike sleep training. Many of the benefits are to the parents: lower stress, better relationship with your child, etc. (In this case, there may be some benefits at school also.) If what you are doing is working for you, great. If not, this might be worth a try. These programs all focus on limiting disruptive behaviors—whining, fighting, tantrums, talking back—and encouraging broadly cooperative behavior like sitting at dinner and getting ready in the morning. What about the more annoying things? Like, say, your kid insisting on singing the same song fifty times in a row? Just as an example. You probably need to live with those. One of the main tenets of these parenting approaches is that discipline should be reserved for actual bad behavior, not for things that are merely annoying.

>Education

>READING TO YOUR CHILD We can begin with a well-established fact. There is a large body of literature showing that children whose parents read to them as babies and preschoolers have better performance on reading tests later.1 However, one should have significant concerns that this relationship is just a correlation, not a causal link. As we know, there are a host of factors that influence reading readiness. One of those factors is having more resources. If you’re struggling to make ends meet and working two jobs, you may not have time to read to your children. Kids in this situation may also be disadvantaged in other ways. One good way to learn something more convincing would be a randomized trial. For example, beginning with a sample of people who, perhaps, do not plan to read much to their child, you can encourage half of them to read to their child more. There are only a few small interventions of this type, most of which do not follow children long enough to evaluate impacts on test scores.2 One recent example is a study that used a video information program with parents to encourage “positive parenting”—specifically, reading aloud and playing—when the kids were infants to age three.3 The authors found improvements in behavior among children whose parents watched the video, providing some suggestive evidence of the role of reading in behavior. But the data doesn’t (yet) extend to school age, so we don’t know the long-term effects. In the absence of randomized evidence, researchers have tried to learn about this with other types of data. A published paper in Child Development in 2018 tried to use within-family variation to study this question.4 Their basic insight was that if you have only one child, you read more to them (since you have more time). The longer you wait to have a second child, the more extra reading time the first child gets. Their idea was to compare achievement across first children with varying lengths of time before the second child arrived. Of course, you should worry that the choice of when to have a second child is not random—this is true—but the authors have a few strategies to try to get around this, notably comparing women who intended to have a child at the same time but differed in when it happened. The results show large positive impacts of reading on children’s achievement. Children who are read to more as young children achieve greater reading success in school. One concern is that these kids just generally get more attention; this is a possibility, but the effects do not extend to math, so the authors argued that it does seem to be something about reading in particular. There is also some neat new evidence from brain scans that help us think a bit about the cognitive effects of reading to children. In one example, researchers took nineteen children aged three to five and put them in a functional MRI (fMRI) machine.5 In general, fMRI studies are designed to use the technology to look at which parts of the brain light up (i.e., are activated/in use) when some stimulus is provided. In this particular study, the kids were put in the fMRI machine and then were read stories. What the researchers found was that children who were read to more at home showed more brain activation in the areas of the brain thought to be responsible for narrative processing and imagery. Basically, it looked like kids who were read to more were processing the story more effectively. How this links to later reading is unclear, and the study was small (fMRI scans are really expensive to run). Nevertheless, it provides some further evidence on the mechanisms that might drive effects. This all suggests that reading to your child is probably a good idea. This literature goes further and actually provides some guidance on how to read to your child. In particular, researchers have found that the benefits are bigger with more interactive reading.6 Rather than just reading a book, kids benefit from being asked open-ended questions: “Where do you think the bird’s mother is?” “Do you think it hurts Pop when the kids hop on him?” “How do you think the Cat in the Hat is feeling now?”

>Montessori education focuses on a particular classroom structure and a set of materials. There is an emphasis—even in young children—on the development of fine motor skills. These schools generally refer to children’s play as “works.” Young children are typically exposed to letters and numbers and writing them in sand, counting blocks, and so on. Reggio Emilia–inspired schools put more emphasis on play, with typically little formal letter or number exposure at preschool ages. (One Reggio Emilia–style preschool I visited told me they explicitly do not spend any time on letters for the three- and four-year-old class, and wouldn’t even display letter cards around the room. This seemed a little extreme.) The Waldorf schools have a heavy outdoor component and, similar to Reggio Emilia, are largely play-based. The Waldorf principles focus on learning through play and art, and tend to also have some domestic-activity component (cooking, baking, gardening).

>There are some studies showing the children in Montessori preschools perform better on reading and math tests compared to a control group in non-Montessori options.12 But many of the papers on this are very old, and it’s not clear that early learning of reading and math skills are the main goals of preschool education. Indeed, the non-Montessori approaches often emphasize the importance of play and argue that early literacy is not an important outcome. Proponents of this argument will often point to Finland, where (famously) most children attend a state-run kindergarten that does not attempt to teach reading fluency. Kids learn to read starting in first grade (although, realistically, some of them do read before that). These proponents will also commonly note that Finland performs very well on international standardized tests—much better than the US—and argue that this means we may put too much emphasis on the value of early literacy. The fact that Finland performs better than the US is not a helpful observation, in my view, since many places perform better than the US on these tests. This includes many countries in Asia with much more rigorous early-life instruction. And the actual evidence on the relative value of this approach is thin. There are a couple of non-randomized studies from outside the US showing that children who learn to read later do catch up in terms of reading within a few years and that teaching the alphabet early doesn’t necessarily impact reading.13 But on the other hand, we know that programs like Head Start, which focus on early literacy, do improve school performance early on. All this is to say that, again, we simply do not have a lot of concrete data to guide you. Further complicating both research and decision-making, it is possible—even likely—that the best type of preschool will vary by individual child. If your kid struggles to sit still, they may find an environment focused on fine motor skills to be taxing; on the other hand, it may be good for them. So it may really be useless to try to learn what is best for your kid from a study—even a good one—that estimates the effect of a type of preschool for the average child.

>Internal Politics

>Internal Politics When you change something substantial about your relationship with your partner, there is bound to be some conflict. For example, the first time you live together—at least for most couples—has its moments of tension. When I first moved in with Jesse, I recall a deep and lasting conflict over kitchen sponge etiquette. He believes you should wring out the sponge and place it next to the sink when done using it. I take a more laissez-faire approach to the sponge, preferring to let it lie where it falls in the sink. It drove him crazy when he’d come to the sink hours after I’d been there to find a still wet and now smelly sponge soaking in its own juices. Ultimately, we fixed this by some combination of my attempts to improve (although before I sat down to write this chapter, I noticed I had left the sponge in the sink, soaking wet, the night before, so obviously I have not improved much in fifteen years) and his attempts to let it go (even though he is objectively correct about the right thing to do in this case). The most important change was probably the decision to have him do the dishes. I am proud to say it has been years since we have had any sponge-related conflict.

>We can see this in a variety of studies that look at the relationship between parenthood and marital satisfaction. These go back as early as 1970, with a paper showing that between the pre-childbearing period and the period of having school-aged children, the share of mothers reporting low marital satisfaction rises gradually from 12 percent to 30 percent, with an abrupt jump in the first year of the child’s life. The marriage does not recover until parents become grandparents.3 Meta-analyses of more recent data show similar things—parents are less happy with their marriages than nonparents. The changes seem to be most abrupt in the first year, and then there is some recovery, although not complete.4 As one study helpfully notes, “In sum, parenthood hastens marital decline. . . .”5 It is worth noting that these studies do tend to find that people who are happier before they have kids recover better, and that planned pregnancies are less impactful than unplanned ones. And the effects are not enormously large. Many people are still, on net, happy with their spouse. Just, you know, slightly less.

>Expansions

>This chapter is about the choice of whether to have more than one child, and, if you decide to have another child, the choice of timing. Is there an “optimal” number of children? Or an ideal spacing between them? Spoiler alert: There isn’t much of a science-based answer to these questions. Any small impacts are likely to be dramatically outweighed by the most important consideration, which is what works for your family.

>The basic theory that there is a quantity-quality trade-off would imply that if you have more kids, they will do worse in terms of human capital—less education, maybe lower IQ. But this is just a theory—what does the data say? As with most things in the book, this is difficult to test, since the kinds of parents who have many children differ from those who have few. But some researchers have done this, generally using a method with “surprise” births. They look at the arrival of twins as something that increases the size of the family while not affecting the number of children you actually wanted.1 The results from the best of these papers generally show that the number of children plays a relatively little role in determining schooling or IQ.2 They do find that birth order matters. Later-born children tend to do (slightly) worse on IQ tests and get less schooling than their earlier-born siblings. This may be due to parents having less time and resources to devote to them. But it’s not the number of children that drives the association. A firstborn child with two siblings seems to do the same as a firstborn child with one.3

>Growing Up and Letting Go

>The thing is,” one of them told us, “when our kids were four and one, we used to look at each other and say, ‘I can’t wait until they are in high school and everything will be easy.’ Then finally, last year, they were both in high school, and what we learned is that there is no problem that cannot be solved with a four-hour discussion every night about the minute details of high-school social life.” When you’re in the thick of it with very early parenting—with the exhaustion and uncertainty of it all—there is the promise in the distance of a time when your child will use the bathroom on their own, put on their own jacket, and eat with a fork. And it is definitely true that the first time my son came out of the bathroom and said he had peed on his own, I did a little jig. But there is a flip side. Little kids mean mostly little problems. As your kid gets bigger, the number of things you worry about goes down, but they get more important. Is my kid achieving academically? Are they fitting in socially? Most important, are they happy?

>Here’s what I’m worried about. We are going on this vacation, and there are bees. It’s kind of isolated. What if Penelope is stung? She’s never been stung before. What if she’s allergic? How will I get her to a doctor in time? Should I bring something to be prepared for this? Should we test her in advance? Do I need an EpiPen?” Dr. Li paused. She looked at me. And then she said, very calmly: “Hmm. I’d probably just try not to think about that.” And that’s it. “Just try not to think about that.” She was right, obviously. I had built up this elaborate and incredibly unlikely scenario in my head. Yes, this could all happen. But so could a million other things. Parenting cannot be about thinking about every possible eventuality, every possible misstep. Sometimes, you just need to let it go. So, yes, it makes sense to take parenting seriously, and to want to make the best choices for your kid and the best choices for you. But there will be many times that you need to just trust that if you’re doing your best, that’s all you can do. Being present and happy with your kids is more important than, say, worrying about bees.