# Die with Zero
Author: Bill Perkins
[Amazon](https://amzn.to/3hyIr9m)
[Goodreads](https://www.goodreads.com/en/book/show/52950915-die-with-zero)

>Death wakes people up, and the closer it gets, the more awake and aware we become. When the end is near, we suddenly start thinking, What the hell am I doing? Why did I wait this long? Until then, most of us go through life as if we had all the time in the world.

>I’ve come up with several guiding principles that make sense. These are the ideas behind this book. For example, some experiences can be enjoyed only at certain times: Most people can’t go water-skiing in their nineties. Another principle: Although we all have at least the potential to make more money in the future, we can never go back and recapture time that is now gone. So it makes no sense to let opportunities pass us by for fear of squandering our money. Squandering our lives should be a much greater worry.

>We Are All Alike, We Are All Different Living life fully takes many forms. For example, I love to travel and I love poker, so I take lots of trips, some of them to play in poker tournaments. This means I spend a big percentage of my savings each year on travel and on poker. But don’t get me wrong: I am not an advocate for everyone spending their savings on travel, let alone poker. What I am an advocate for is deciding what makes you happy and then converting your money into the experiences you choose. Those enjoyable experiences naturally vary from person to person; some people are active and adventurous, others prefer to stay close to home. Some get great satisfaction from splurging on themselves and their families and friends, while others prefer to spend their time and money on those less fortunate than themselves. And, of course, we can enjoy a mix of experiences. As much as I love to travel, I also like to spend my time and money to advance causes I care about, from railing against bank bailouts to bringing in hurricane relief to my neighbors on the U.S. Virgin Islands. So I’m certainly not trying to tell you that one set of experiences is better than another; instead, you should choose your experiences deliberately and purposefully rather than living life on autopilot, as too many of us do. Of course, it’s more complicated than just knowing what makes you happy and spending your money on those experiences at every moment. That’s because our ability to enjoy different kinds of experiences changes throughout our lifetimes. Think about it: If your parents took you along on a tour of Italy when you were a toddler, how much did you get out of that expensive vacation, besides maybe a lifelong love of gelato? Or consider the other extreme: How much do you think you’ll enjoy climbing Rome’s Spanish Steps when you’re in your nineties—assuming you’ll still be alive and able to climb them at all by then? As the title of one economics journal article put it, “What Good Is Wealth Without Health?”
Why Die with Zero?

>If you die with $1 million left, that’s $1 million of experiences you didn’t have. And if you die with $50,000 left, well, that’s $50,000 of experiences you didn’t have. No way is that optimal.

>How long does that $770,000 last her? Well, it depends on how much she spends each year. Research on people’s actual retirement spending shows that spending isn’t constant, and often declines in later years (as I’ll explain shortly). But, again keeping our example simple, let’s assume Elizabeth spends exactly $32,000 each year of retirement, or just shy of $1,000 less than she did when she was working. (Again, for the sake of simplicity, let’s assume that the return on her retirement investments exactly matches the annual rise in the cost of living.) With that assumption, her savings will last a little more than 24 years ($770,000 divided by $32,000 per year). But Elizabeth doesn’t live another 24 years: She dies at 85, or 20 years after she left the workforce. As a result, she leaves behind $130,000. I’m telling you this because I want you to really think about the true cost, the terrible waste, of leaving behind $130,000. I’ve already said that you can think of this money as forgone experiences—whatever the $130,000 could have bought for Elizabeth. That’s sad in itself, but it’s not only that. By looking at what it took to save that much money—at Elizabeth’s hourly rate—you can see how many hours she spent in her office job that she did not need to spend. How many hours was that? Well, divide the $130,000 by $19.56 an hour and you get a little more than 6,646. That’s 6,646 hours that Elizabeth worked for money she never got to spend. That’s more than two and a half years of 50-hour workweeks! Two and a half years of working for free. What a waste of life energy.

>But for whatever reason, she just could not spend the money. She was just too thrifty for her own good—someone who actually kept every couch, love seat, and easy chair covered in plastic to protect the upholstery from wear and tear. Unfortunately, of course, the plastic also made the furniture uncomfortable and unattractive. One day I came into my grandmother’s house for somebody’s funeral and sat on a colorful, comfy couch—she had taken the plastic off for this special occasion. But the next time I visited, all the plastic was back on, and it stayed on for the rest of my grandmother’s life. This never made sense to me: Why spend all this money on furniture that you don’t get to enjoy? The plastic over the couches is a microcosmic example of much of what I’m talking about in this book: the senselessness of indefinitely delayed gratification.

>But let’s say you’re not part of the vast majority—let’s say you’re worth millions or tens of millions. What then? Even if I earn enough that I could save up for a few extra months of life in the hospital, I can’t see the logic in doing that: There’s a big difference between living a life and just being kept alive, and I’d much rather spend on the former. So I will not work for years to save up for a few more months on a ventilator with a quality of life that’s close to zero—or, depending on the level of suffering, maybe even negative. So instead of engaging in “precautionary saving,” as economists call the practice, I’ll let the cards fall where they may. We all die sooner or later, and I’d rather die when the time is right than sacrifice my better years just to squeeze out a few more days at the tail end.

>Besides, it is much smarter to spend your healthcare money on the front end (to maintain your health and try to prevent disease) than to spend it at the end, when you get a lot less bang for every buck you spend. In fact, many insurance companies not only cover preventive care such as mammograms but believe enough in the long-term cost savings of disease prevention that they actually pay you (in the form of gift cards, for example) to get regular screenings and other preventive care. You won’t be able to avert every possible illness, no matter what you do, but you can make some health problems a lot less likely—and you’ll enjoy better quality of life all along the way.

>I do understand the desire to be taken care of when you’re old and vulnerable. So how do you make sure you’re covered if you need long-term care, without having to save up massive amounts of money you won’t spend if you don’t need nursing care? The answer: long-term care insurance. Look into it and you might discover that it costs less than you think, especially if you start paying premiums before you’re 65. There’s a more general point I want to get across: For every single thing you might be worried about in your future, there is an insurance product to protect you. That doesn’t mean I recommend buying insurance for every single thing; obviously, insurance costs money. But the fact that insurance companies are willing to sell insurance for various risks shows that these risks can be quantified—and removed for those who don’t want to take those risks.

>Final Countdown Like all living creatures, humans have evolved to survive. Of course, we want to do more than just survive; for example, I’m sure if I asked you if you want to survive or really thrive, you’d choose thriving. But our biology is such that efforts to live the best life we can often don’t come as naturally or as strongly as the basic instinct to survive. Avoiding death is our number one priority, and that single goal dwarfs everything else. My friend Cooper Richey put it well when he said, “The human brain is wired to be irrational about death.” People avoid the subject of death, they behave as if it’s never coming, and too many don’t plan for it. It’s just some sort of mystery date in one’s future when we expire. This kind of blanket denial explains why so many people are willing to spend tens or even hundreds of thousands of dollars to prolong life for just a few more weeks. Think about it: That’s money that they spent years or decades working hard for. They gave up years of their life while healthy and vibrant to buy a few extra weeks of life when they are sick and immobile. If that’s not irrational, I don’t know what is!

>What happens in between? When I was back in my twenties, I could always find new things to do with money. Cash in your twenties has a lot of utility. So when I looked at these three points—the baby, the twenty-something, and the old person—I realized that there must be a curve. In other words, if the horizontal axis on a graph represents your age, and the vertical axis represents your capacity to enjoy life experiences that money can buy, then if you were to plot your potential enjoyment by age, you would see some kind of curve. Think of it this way: Given the same amount of money each year (let’s say $100,000), you will be able to extract a lot more enjoyment out of that money at some points in your life than at others. The utility of money changes over time, and it does so in a fairly predictable way: Starting sometime in your twenties, your health very subtly starts to decline, causing a corresponding decline in your ability to enjoy money. Ability to Enjoy Experiences Based on Health Everyone's health declines with age. Wealth, on the other hand, tends to grow over the years as people save up more and more. But worsening health gradually constrains your enjoyment of that wealth as more and more physical activities become impossible to enjoy, no matter how much money you can afford to spend on them. This thought immediately suggested practical implications: If your capacity to enjoy life experiences is higher at some ages than others, then it makes sense to spend more of your money at certain ages than others! For example, because $100,000 has more value in your fifties than it does in your eighties, and your goal is to maximize your enjoyment of your money and your life, it’s in your best interest to shift at least some of that money from your eighties into your fifties. For the same reason, it’s in your best interest to shift some of it to your twenties, thirties, and forties, as well. Making these kinds of conscious financial shifts essentially creates a lifetime spending plan that takes into account the changing utility of money.

>Balancing Health, Money, and Time Across Your Life Think about the three basics people need to have to get the most out of life: health, free time, and money. The problem is that these things rarely all come together at once. Young people tend to have abundant health and a good deal of free time, but they don’t usually have a lot of money. Retirees in their sixties, seventies, and beyond—the other end of the spectrum—have abundant time (and often more money than young people), but, unfortunately, they have less health, and thus a diminished ability to enjoy the time and money they do have than the young do.

>I know there are a few lucky souls among us who are indeed “living the dream” and they are doing in life what they always dreamed of doing. These are those rare individuals who can’t wait to get to work each day and who feel bad when they have to go home at night. They truly love what they are doing. But again, those individuals are few and far between. You may be one of them. But if you’re not one of the lucky ones—if you’re more in love with the paycheck you bring home than with the daily experiences of being in your office—then the time has come to do a real gut check on your life and to determine what you really want to get out of it. Our culture’s focus on work is like a seductive drug. It takes all of your yearning for discovery and wonder and experiences, promising to give you the means (money) to get all those things—but the focus on the work and the money becomes so single-minded and automatic that you forget what you were yearning for in the first place. The poison becomes the medicine—that’s nuts!