# Direct Truth
Author: Kapil Gupta  
[Amazon](https://amzn.to/3r8Ctz6)  
[Goodreads](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/40947505-direct-truth)  

>Q: How is it that attachment has produced all of these problems between me and my children? A: Attachment gives birth to hope and need. If you are attached to them, you will need them to do certain things, achieve certain things, be a certain way, and behave toward you in a certain way. When they do not, it will cause you pain. When you experience pain, you will behave toward them in a way that pain compels you to behave. And they will behave toward you in a way that their need for freedom compels them to behave. And this will continue for the rest of your lives.

>Q: If I were to raise my children without attachment, what would this do for them? A: They would have freedom. Q: Is it my responsibility to give them freedom? A: It isn’t a question of responsibility. It is a question of living in accordance with nature. Q: Yet you do not believe in responsibilities? A: No. Q: Why, if I may ask? A: Responsibility is a societal creation. No one is truly responsible for another. You do not owe your children anything. They do not owe you anything. If you wish to do, then do. If they wish to do, they may also do. That which comes from the heart is natural and satisfying. That which comes from the idea of responsibility is forced, artificial, and often produces resentment and the expectation for reciprocation.

>Q: Do you not think anger is wrong? A: I don’t view things in terms of right and wrong. Q: Why not? A: Because right and wrong are societo-religious creations. They have no basis in reality.

>HOW DO I HAVE BEAUTIFUL RELATIONSHIPS IN MY LIFE? Q: How do I have beautiful relationships in my life? A: What do you mean by ‘beautiful?” Q: Peaceful. A: Peace without conflict. Q: Yes. A: In order to have peace in a relationship, there must be freedom. Q: What is the definition of freedom? A: That which makes one feel free. Q: Is there not a give and take? A: Not if peace is sought. Q: Is this not counterintuitive? A: Your natural intuition has been replaced by cultural intuition. This being the case, the Truth will always seem counterintuitive. Q: But if there is no give and take will there not be conflict? A: It is compromise that produces conflict. Q: Compromise produces conflict. I’m not sure what to say to that. A: I understand. Q: But if I don’t compromise on what I want, and the other person doesn’t compromise on what they want, will this not produce conflict? A: Each person must examine the source of the want. The why’s and wherefores of the want. In doing so one is able to separate the wants that are reactive and baseless from the wants that are genuine and innocent. It is often the case, that as the reactive wants are removed, the sincere wants are shared between the two individuals. Q: And what does compromise do? A: Compromise muddies the water. It is a cheap and fruitless bartering between the reactive wants of each individual. It perpetuates itself. And moves inevitably toward conflict. Q: What else leads to a peaceful relationship? A: The abandonment of need. Q: But if two individuals don’t need each other, what is the point of a relationship? A: Two individuals who need each other will only have conflict. They can never have a relationship. Q: The things you’re speaking are exactly the opposite of everything I’ve ever heard. A: I understand. Q: So if there’s no need, what binds them together? A: The enjoyment of each other’s company. Q: That’s it? A: This is something very few relationships have. Q: What about love? A: This is too big a word for human beings to understand. Like is more useful and powerful than love. Q: In what way? A: One can hide behind love. One cannot hide behind like. Q: What do you think about divorce? A: If it must be, it must be. Q: Do you think it is a failure? A: It is a failure of understanding. But understanding often does not happen until middle age or later. Marriage typically happens much earlier. Q: So no need, and no compromise. Is this correct? A: A relationship of peace is a relationship that is more parallel than perpendicular. It is two individuals that move side by side. Rather than two individuals that intersect. A maintenance of individuality and freedom results in the prevalence of peace.

>Q: So humans don’t seek happiness. They seek escape from misery? A: Yes. Q: But everyone in the world is looking for happiness. A: Yes. Q: They’re all misguided? A: Yes. Q: Then what should a person seek? A: There is no should. Q: What would it benefit a person to seek? A: Freedom from misery. Freedom from the need for happiness. Q: Wow. How do I do that? A: Through understanding. Q: Understanding what? A: Understanding that happiness is a fleeting emotion. One cannot build a home in it. In understanding this, one naturally begins to seek an alternative.


>A: Yes. The reason that it supposedly takes “10,000 hours” and decades to become what one wishes to become is because one uses a bicycle rather than a locomotive. If you do not know the Truth, you must take the long and arduous road. But the Truth always takes a fraction of the time and provides a far greater result. For even the best coaches and institutions of society know only of becoming a “practitioner.” They have no concept of becoming a Master. It is for this reason that there is parity in all domains. Q: What happens when one becomes a Master? A: He is in a class by himself. He has no equal. And thus, he is beyond competition. Q: Beyond competition? Can you please explain this? A: The one who resorts to competing is the one who has not become a Master. Because he and his competitors are of similar skill, they must fight for scraps. Siddha Training prepares one for a life that is beyond competition. So much so that every match is won before it begins.

>WHAT IS ANGER? Q: What is anger? A: An energy. Q: Why does it arise? A: Anger is born of unfulfilled desire. It is born of unfulfilled expectation. Q: Where there is no desire or expectation, there can be no anger? A: That is correct.

>Q: What is freedom? A: Freedom from the self. Q: What is the self? A: Bondage. Q: In what way? A: Where there is a self, there is an attachment to the self. Where there is an attachment to the self, there is an attachment to all people and things related to the self. Where there is an attachment to people and things, there is endless suffering. Q: This is very difficult to do. A: As difficult as living a life of pain, anxiety, fear, and misery?

>The absolute truth is that if a man does not acquire this freedom, he will have wasted the whole of his life. HOW DOES ONE LIVE AS A GOD? Q: I have heard you speak of living as a god? How does one arrive at this? A: There is a way to live beyond the meager state of a societal human. An existence in which one does not experience problems. And where there is endless satisfaction from one moment to the next. Q: What is this state? A: This is to live within the Cocoon of the Moment Q: How do I arrive in the cocoon of the moment? A: By deciding to leave the world behind. Q: I must leave the world? A: Yes. Q: Where shall I move to? A: You need not move anywhere. Q: I don’t understand. A: In every moment of every day, where do you live? Q: In the world? A: You live inside your mind. The mind is the world. It is a place of endless torment. It is a place which requires you to put out fires that never end. It is a place of recurring bouts of conflict. It is a place of striving, hoping, expectations, desires, disappointments, and sorrows. This is the natural consequence of living in the mind. And, by extension, living within the world. Q: So, what you are saying is that I don’t need to move anywhere. I need to change the place I live and function from within myself. A: Yes. Q: And this Shangri-La that you speak of, this God-hood, is the Cocoon of the Moment. A: Yes. Q: People speak of living within the moment. I try to be present. But it is difficult. A: The way you have been taught to go about it is not only difficult, it is impossible. Q: Why? A: Do you find yourself living permanently in the moment? Q: No. A: Do you find yourself living in the moment eighty percent of the time? Q: No. A: Fifty percent of the time? Q: No. A: Ten percent of the time? Q: No. A: Then why does it surprise you when I tell you that the way you have been taught to go about it is impossible to achieve? Q: I suppose I felt that if I kept at it, I might achieve it. A: This is the carrot that the world dangles before you. Q: Then what is the way? A: This must be understood. One may have the mind or he may have the moment. He cannot have both. Q: Zero sum game? A: I’m afraid so. Q: I cannot deny that I live a life of turmoil. A: If you live in a mud pit, how can you expect not to become muddy? Q: Living in the mind or the world cannot make you happy? A: It can and it often does. But happiness is itself a pile of mud. Q: Happiness is mud? A: Yes. Q: Why? A: Because happiness cannot satisfy any human being. Q: Why not? A: Because it does not exist. Q: Happiness doesn’t exist? A: No. Q: Then what are those times when I feel, for lack of a better term, “happy?” A: A relative reduction in misery. Q: Please tell me more. A: The presence of rain gave birth to the invention of an umbrella. In the same way, the presence of misery gave birth to the idea of happiness. No human being seeks happiness. What he seeks is an escape from misery. Q: So, living in the world produces happiness and misery? A: The world consists of nothing but anxiety and misery. The same way that a swimming pool contains only water. It has nothing else to offer you. This does not mean that one must physically leave the world. It means simply that one must see the world for what it is. And if one sees it for what it is, he or she has a true chance of living a life free of constant assault. Q: And this cocoon of the moment is a freedom from the world? A: The Cocoon of the Moment is the only place that one can truly live. It is not a luxury, or a lofty spiritual endeavor. It is oxygen itself. A fish may attempt to force itself to live on the shore, but it will tremble and writhe throughout its existence. For it was not meant to live outside of the water. Similarly, man has created this world. But he was not meant to live within it. The architect of a prison is not required to live within his creation. To live outside the mind is to live within the world, yet above the world. Beyond its poisonous tentacles. It is like walking through water without getting wet. This is what it means to live as a god. Q: And there is a way to do this? A: Yes. It is an honest, genuine, and sincere journey in which the Truth is constantly seen at every step. And the more one understands the Truth, the more deeply he begins to experience it. And the more deeply he begins to experience it, it becomes home. And the turmoil that was once his life begins to completely fall away. Once he has reached this stage, he becomes the Creator of his life. By a simple wave of his hand, he controls all things. And becomes a god.

>WHAT IS THE ONLY WAY TO TRULY, TRULY LIVE? Q: What is the only way to truly, truly live? A: By living without a self. Q: How is such a thing possible? A: By understanding that there is no self within you. Q: But I feel a self. A: The thing that you feel is the mind’s greatest illusion. It does not exist. Q: Shall I keep telling myself this? A: No. Q: Then how shall I come to living without a self?

>A: Investigation. Desperation. And understanding. Q: Investigation, desperation, and understanding? A: Yes. Q: But I have always been told to love myself. And to improve myself. A: Yes. Q: Is this not correct? A: One cannot love or improve something that does not exist. Q: If what you say is true, then the entire self-help industry is a falsehood. A: There is no self to be improved. But you are welcome to carry on believing that there is. Q: I’d like to understand this. If I have anxieties, sorrows, disappointments, anger, and so forth . . . Can I not try to lessen these things? A: Where there is a fertile field, weeds will grow. One may choose to pull out the weeds if he so wishes. But he will be doing so for all his life. For each time he removes one, another will sprout in its place.

>Q: Then what is the solution to not having weeds? A: Annihilate the field. Q: And the field is the self, correct? A: Yes. Q: But it sounds so wrong to annihilate the field. A: Firstly, there is no wrong or right. Secondly, the field that you will be annihilating did not exist to begin with. What you are annihilating is a false idea. Q: If I have no self, how will I function? A: Perfectly. Q: Why? A: Because where there is no self, there is no

>Where there is no self, there is no confusion. Where there is no self, there is no complications, upheavals, conflicts, or turmoils. There is nothing. And where there is nothing, one is available to everything.