# Family Fortunes: How to Build Family Wealth and Hold on to It for 100 Years
Authors: Bill and Will Bonner
[Amazon](https://amzn.to/3B1gRJy)  
[Goodreads](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/13838416-family-fortunes)  

>If there is one thing that marks families with money over the long term it is this: delayed gratification. There are psychologists who believe that the performance of different cultures can be largely explained by this single point. Those who look ahead to the future and those that plan for it—surprise, surprise!—have better futures. There are even some geo-theorists who believe that the relative outperformance of certain ethnic groups of people can be explained in the same way. How come Europe grew rich while Africa remained poor? How come North America is relatively rich, while South America is relatively poor? (However, this was a better question a few years ago, when the differences were more obvious.) How come, generally, colder countries are more successful than warmer ones? The reason, they believe, is that colder climates force a longer-term view. Believe it or not, there are still groups of primitive hunter-gatherers living on the African savannah. Anthropologists studying them have found little sense of the future. They do not prepare for it because they don’t need to. One day’s hunt is much like the next. One day’s nuts and berries differ little from those of the day before. No need to think much about the future or to plan for it. Presumably, people very similar to these primitive tribes spread into Europe and Asia, and there they encountered new challenges. Thirty thousand years ago, there were human tribes following the caribou along the face of Europe’s continental glacier. Near our house in France there is a cave that provides evidence. For thousands of years, a group of hunters made the cave a stopping point. But it was only a stopping point. They followed the herds of caribou that ranged over Europe at the time. As the weather changed, so did their lifestyle. They had to change their living patterns—and their living places—to keep up with the weather. In cold climates, you need to stock food, clothing . . . and prepare shelter . . . in anticipation of bad weather. In some places, growing seasons are only a few months long. People had to work night and day in order to put aside enough for the long, cold season ahead. Whether this brought about a change in the habits of mind that cause a person to think about the future—or whether the harsh climate merely eliminated people who could not prepare for it—we don’t know. But somehow the idea took . . . and became more than an idea; it became a cultural rule.

>Another group that has been extraordinarily effective at creating and preserving wealth is the Jews. Many Jews throughout history have worked not as farmers, but as tradesmen, merchants, doctors, teachers, and moneylenders. Frequently, if not generally, they were denied ownership of land. They couldn’t plant trees. They couldn’t plant anything. Often, they didn’t have the need to “save the seed corn.” You’d think they would be the biggest spendthrifts and “live for today” crowd on Earth. But they are not. They are careful with wealth. And extremely forward-looking. Why? Well, one thing that comes readily to mind is that Jews are also extremely oriented toward their own history. And history is a kind of future in reverse. Perhaps it gave them the same focus on the need for preparedness.

>Jewish history is a long story of disasters, one after another. Many of those disasters involved avoiding extermination by fleeing. And fleeing costs money.

>The Jews, perhaps more than anyone, had to think ahead. They had to be prepared. At any minute, the heavy boot of the state or the mob might come down on them. They could not plant trees. But they accumulated wealth, often in the form of gold and diamonds. It is no coincidence that they are the world’s leading moneymen today. In fact, with the Jews in mind, we might broaden our hypothesis into a general theory: Adversity leads a people to appreciate preparedness. Wealth is preparation in negotiable form.

>withhold money from their children in order to toughen them up, so that they will “find their own ways” or “make it on their own.” Many favor giving their fortunes to charity in order to avoid corrupting their own kin. This is nonsense, in our view. All wealth either is consumed or must be owned and managed by someone. Serious Old Money accepts the responsibility of taking care of its own money and preparing the next generation to do likewise.

>The key to this approach is that you have to learn to use time to your advantage. Time works against almost everybody. But if you want your family to maintain wealth over several generations, you have to make time work for you or you’re doomed. Time destroys fortunes in obvious ways, and in some ways that aren’t so obvious. Each year that passes imposes costs: living costs, taxes, maintenance, and so forth. There are also investment costs: fees, commissions, charges. Plus, there are inevitable setbacks: bear markets, errors, oversights, inflation, crashes, fraudsters. All cost you money, sometimes big money. You have to limit these costs, which isn’t easy, and you need to earn higher rates of return to offset them. You can do it, with a little luck, if you let time work for you. The typical investor is betting against time. He buys a stock. He hopes the stock will go up . . . and that he will then get out before time takes it back down again. But if you’re willing to let time help you, you can wait long enough to see what direction the market is taking. The big trends are long-term trends. The last big bull market on Wall Street lasted 25 years. The bear market before that lasted 16 years. The bull market in bonds began in 1983 . . . and it’s still going on. These are the trends that pay off. And if you listen and watch carefully, you can see them coming and going. And you can use them to limit your losses and improve your gains. But that is not the most important thing. Time also has a devastating effect on families. People grow old. They’re no longer able to do the work required to maintain a dynamic, capable family. New family members are often less able or distracted. Husbands, wives, children—every new family member comes with risks attached. And over time, one or two of those time bombs is bound to blow up. More important than the money, the family has to be kept strong and healthy. A strong family can make money. A weak family can’t even hold onto money that someone else made. A strong family can build and develop business opportunities. A weak family can only fumble and destroy them. A strong family can meet its financial, business, and other challenges. A weak family collapses under the pressure of them.

>Families receded in importance with the rise of the social welfare nation-state. The promise of modern government was that it would take care of its people. And the illusion was that it didn’t matter what kind of family you came from, that you would be equal to every other citizen. You would have equal access to public transportation, public education, job opportunities, and, ultimately—a good life. Occasionally, the idea of the state as a replacement for the family was taken to extremes. Soviet-era work farms took charge of children at a very early age and raised them to be good communists. At least, that was the idea. Free from the biases, privileges, and residual bourgeois sentiments of family life, a collectively raised child was supposed to be the “new man” the Soviets thought they needed. What they got was a failed experiment and a nation of alcoholics. Still, in modern developed countries, people are meant to owe greater allegiance to the government than to their own kin. They pledge allegiance to the flag. They register for the draft. They pay taxes. When they are in need, they visit a government assistance center. When they have a health problem, they expect a government-funded health system to take care of them. When they are unemployed, they look to the government to pay them—and to tide them over until they find another job. If unemployment is statistically high, they expect the government to take action to fix the problem. And if there is a natural disaster, such as the flooding of New Orleans, they look to the government to look out for them. Yet government’s performance has been spotty. In fact, every study ever done concludes that the family can be far more helpful to an individual than the state. Schools with more parental involvement—in areas with “good” families—produce higher test results. People from successful families earn more money. People whose parents were happily married are more likely to be happily married themselves. Neighborhoods with stable, decent families have lower crime rates. People from good families even live longer. People with some family money behind them are more likely to start successful businesses. Successful families help their members overcome problems. Help them get back on their feet when they fall. They help them in countless ways, most of them immeasurable. Governments spend enormous amounts of money. Presumably, this money is intended to help people lead better lives. But there is no evidence that people are any better off. And there is strong reason to suspect that they would be better off if the money spent by the government had been left in the hands of the families it came from.

>There are four primary elements of family wealth: the human, intellectual, organizational, and financial capital that a family possesses.

>Money that is earned too easily or too fast tends to go as quickly and as readily as it arrived. That is largely because money that is too easily made is held in contempt by those who make it. It is like a woman’s heart that is too easily won or a prize that is too easily awarded. It loses value. It also takes time to learn how to keep money. Money earned over a long time comes with valuable lessons attached. You learn how to manage it. How to invest it. How not to waste it. Often, you are loath to spend it. Failure to learn those lessons is usually fatal to a family’s wealth. That’s also why “new money” tends to have such a tinny look to it. You expect it to wear out fast. Old Money, however, has a more solid look—like it might last forever.

>Human capital is typically described as the knowledge, ability, and experience that individual family members possess. But it’s much more than that. It’s also a family’s emotional stability, its culture, its willingness to take risks, its willingness to work hard and to forgo immediate gratification, its ability to get along and pull together to protect itself, as well as to achieve common goals. Focus on the attributes of the individuals in your family unit for a moment. . . . There are the physical attributes: The family members are short. They are tall. They are good looking. They are homely. There are mental attributes: They are smart. They are dumb. Then there are the personalities: They are honest. They are liars. They are trustworthy. They are hard working. Some are healthy; some are sickly. The individual members of your family and their unique, or not so unique, characteristics are what make up the human capital of the family. Much of what constitutes a family’s human capital is beyond our reach. People are born with certain features. Many of them you can’t do anything about. They are what they are. (Note that you can change a family’s human capital, even the parts that seem immutable, by bringing other people into the family, either by marriage or adoption. More on that in the next chapter.)

>You develop human capital by fostering the growth of natural talents and the pursuit of individual happiness among family members. Your human capital can also have liabilities, such as substance abuse, behavioral issues, medical problems, investment delusions, or disabled elderly family members. Families must do everything they can to resolve these issues. If they can’t fix them, they have to make sure they protect themselves from them. Those liabilities sit there on the family balance sheet, whether you acknowledge them or not. If the family and its wealth are not insulated against these problems, they are just waiting for trouble.