# Finding Ultra
Author: Rich Roll  
[Amazon](https://amzn.to/2Vx3aSg)  
[Goodreads](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/39665673-finding-ultra) 

>“The mass of men lead lives of quiet desperation, and go to the grave with the song still in them.”—HENRY DAVID THOREAU

>Knowing this about myself, and harnessing the tools I’d developed in recovery, I understood that any true or lasting lifestyle change would require rigor, specificity, and accountability. Vague notions of “eating better” or maybe “going to the gym more often” just weren’t going to work. I needed an urgent and stringent plan. I needed to draw a firm line in the sand.

>In the most general sense, I eat and recommend plant-based, whole foods and advise staying away from processed foods. I don’t like to overcomplicate the eating part of my life, and I don’t obsess. I don’t prepare elaborate or expensive dishes. I don’t weigh my food, count macros, or overthink my proportion of carbohydrates to proteins to fats. Why? Because getting overly caught up in such minute details leads to burnout. And burnout always leads back to old habits. The name of the game is sustainability. And simply put, if it’s too complicated, it’s not sustainable. And if it’s not sustainable, what’s the point? Not only does it have to work, it has to be user-friendly, operating with relative ease within the framework of the modern busy family. The general take-away is this: eat plants. Lots of different kinds. Vegetables, fruits, nuts, grains, seeds, legumes. Every meal. All the time. All colors, all sizes, and simply prepared, close to their natural state. Keep it varied and focus on seasonality. Stick to the perimeter of the grocery store and avoid the middle aisles, which generally feature processed and refined foods. Don’t eat things with ingredients you can’t pronounce or that aren’t found in nature. Try to eat organic and locally grown produce when at all possible. Stay away from refined sugar. And as for oils—use sparingly or avoid altogether.

>Every day that you swap the animal products off your plate and replace them with plants not only immunizes you against the many chronic lifestyle illnesses that kill and disable millions annually, it saves (on average) an extraordinary 1,000 gallons of water, 30 square feet of forested land, 20 pounds of CO2 equivalent, and one animal’s life. Chew on that.

>Before he would even begin to train me, Chris insisted that I undertake what is called a lactate test—a torturous procedure scientifically designed to identify a person’s level of fitness with relative exactitude. So the first week of May 2008 I visited Phase IV Scientific Health and Performance Center in Santa Monica. My bike was rigged up to a machine called a CompuTrainer, which used a computer to calculate my cycling cadence and watts—the measure of power my legs exerted with each pedal stroke. After a brief warm-up, watts—or pedal resistance—were progressively increased every four minutes until failure. And with each successive four-minute interval, my heart rate was recorded and my blood tested—all to evaluate the level of lactate in my system, an indicator of physiological fatigue. I felt good, and figured I’d rocked the test. Chris’s response? “Just as I thought.” Translation: I couldn’t have been more wrong. Despite all my self-styled “training,” the test results were dismal, reflecting the farthest thing from a truly fit endurance athlete. “If you want to work with me,” Chris lectured, “you’re going to have to throw out the window everything you learned as a swimmer. We start over. And do it my way. It will take patience, time, and discipline. And you’re going to get even slower before you get faster.” “I’m in.” The date was May 7, 2008. Just one month shy of my ten-year anniversary in sobriety. What ensued was a training program focused entirely on building the capacity and efficiency of my endurance engine. Our bodies have two basic energy-burning systems. The first is the “aerobic system,” which utilizes oxygen and fat for fuel. It’s your “go all day” mechanism that fuels activity up to a certain level of intensity. But when the intensity of exertion exceeds what is called the “aerobic threshold”—the point at which my lactate test curve began to escalate skyward—then the secondary system known as the “anaerobic system” takes over. Used to power more extreme efforts, such as sprint bursts, heavy weight lifts, and fast running, the anaerobic system utilizes glycogen, or sugar, for energy. And it can only be turned on for about ninety minutes before it shuts down, depleted. Proficiency in endurance sports, explained Chris, is all about building the efficiency of the aerobic, “go all day” system. To accomplish this, I needed to focus on training that system specifically—which meant staying in the second of five specific training “zones” that are established by the lactate test. For a guy like me, that meant slowing down. Way down. No more gut-busting trail runs. Forget about battling my buddies up the Santa Monica Mountains on the bike. From that minute forward, I was to never escalate my heart rate above 140 beats per minute on any run. And on the bike? Cap it at 130. Zone Two. All day. Every day. “But if all I do is go slow, how will I ever get fast?” I asked Chris. “The prize never goes to the fastest guy,” Chris replied. “It goes to the guy who slows down the least.” True in endurance sports. And possibly even truer in life. Doing a bit of corroborative research, I discovered a consensus that consistent Zone Two (aka Z2) training for the endurance athlete will, over time, stimulate an increase in mitochondrial density in muscle cells. And a proliferation of these mitochondria—the cells’ power generators—in turn enhances both the efficiency of the aerobic engine and the duration for which one can perform endurance exercise. Do it long enough and Z2 training will lead to an increase in aerobic threshold—the maximum level of intensity at which the body continues to process oxygen and fat for fuel. Up to this point, I’d been spending the vast majority of my running, cycling, and swimming sessions in what is referred to as the “gray zone”—a dreaded no-man’s-land where the effort exerted exceeds that which is required to properly develop the aerobic engine, yet falls short of the intensity necessary to significantly improve speed or increase anaerobic threshold. It’s that level of effort that leaves you feeling nice and winded after a brisk run but yields little in terms of performance improvement. In actuality, such training undermines true progress. It leaves you tired, with little to no gains in either endurance or speed. It creates plateaus that stunt athletic development, and often leads to injury. And it is by far the most common mistake made by amateur endurance athletes—myself included. In other words, the typical amateur endurance athlete trains far too hard on the aerobic and active recovery days. But not nearly hard enough on the intense days. A certain level of proficiency can be achieved this way, but full potential is never realized. Beyond the scientific mumbo-jumbo, I still struggled with just how counterintuitive it all seemed. All I ever knew was No pain, no gain. Go hard, or go home. And now I was being told the exact opposite. It defied everything I’d ever believed about how to condition the body. “You’re just going to have to trust me,” Chris said. “And get a heart-rate monitor. Because it’s going to be your new best friend.” So with my newly purchased GPS watch proudly tightened around my wrist and counterpart heart-rate monitor strap awkwardly bound across my chest, I headed out for my first official workout under Chris’s tutelage, a brief forty-five-minute Z2 run on nearby Victory Trail, on Ahmanson Ranch, a three-thousand-acre open-space preserve smack in the middle of the San Fernando Valley. Forty-five minutes? That’s it? Doesn’t Chris realize I’ve been banging out two- to three-hour runs for a year? I felt like he was treating me like a child. I resisted embracing the truth—that when it came to endurance sports, I was less than a child; I was an infant. But that denial was about to morph into acceptance. I began with a very light jog to warm up, and after five minutes or so, I checked my heart rate to make sure I was in the proper zone—in other words, heart rate below 140 beats per minute. 150! It must be a glitch, I thought, since I was barely moving. The GPS signal on my watch bounced off an invisible satellite overhead to register my pace at a slovenly ten minutes per mile. No, it was accurate. My aerobic system, it seemed, was simply so undeveloped that even the slightest jog had pushed my heart rate above my aerobic threshold into verboten gray zone terrain. I couldn’t believe it. In fact, I had to slow to almost a shuffle just to settle in the 140s. And when I hit even the slightest hill, I had to walk just to keep it in check. Meanwhile, I suffered the humiliation of allowing more than a few less-than-svelte joggers fly past me on the trail. Chris said it would take discipline to rebuild. I was now starting to understand what he meant. A different kind of discipline—the discipline to slow down.

>Only a week later I found myself at Jamba Juice, awaiting a large carrot-and-orange concoction after a morning run, when I casually picked up a copy of Competitor magazine lying on the countertop. One of those free multisport-focused periodicals with race schedules and obligatory running-shoe reviews found in most large cities, a piece in the magazine featured a picture of a large and impossibly muscled African-American man running shirtless in Hawaii. Entranced, I began reading the amazing story of a Navy SEAL known as David Goggins. A former football player and power lifter who once tipped the scales at 290 pounds, Goggins decided to honor the tragic death of several of his fellow SEALs and raise funds for the Special Operations Warrior Foundation by competing in some of the most difficult endurance challenges in the world. “When I joined the military, I couldn’t run to the mailbox,” he once famously said. Yet in 2006, he nonetheless completed an event I’d never heard of called Badwater—a 135-mile jaunt through Death Valley in heat so intense that it melts the rubber right off your running shoes. And three months after Badwater, he participated in a mysterious event called the Ultraman World Championships. A three-day stage race circumnavigating the entire Big Island of Hawaii, which is roughly the size of Connecticut, the event entailed swimming 6.2 miles, cycling 260 miles, and, on the third day, running 52.4 miles. More than twice the distance of an Ironman! And despite having never before competed in a single triathlon or cycling event, and riding much of the course on a borrowed bicycle in his running shoes, Goggins finished second overall. Unbelievable.

>THE ROAD TO ULTRAMAN So it began. With fewer than six months to steel my body, mind, and soul for this seemingly insurmountable adventure, I had absolutely zero room for error. Chris and I began by building my training volume slowly to ensure against injury, no small possibility given my body’s previous dormant decades. At first, it was around ten hours a week. A couple one-hour swims. Two or three Z2 runs of only an hour to ninety minutes maximum. A longer bike ride on Saturday morning, anywhere from three to four steady hours. And a longer run on Sunday, generally about 90 to 110 minutes in length. In a perfect world, I would have supplemented my rotation of swimming, cycling, and running with a wide variety of cross-training and rehabilitative pursuits: a modicum of weight lifting to improve overall strength, which wanes with age, particularly past forty; weekly massage and use of foam rollers to remove scar-tissue buildup and enhance blood flow to aid in muscle recovery and further ensure against injury; yoga for flexibility; core workouts to improve body stability and enhance my swim, bike, and run form; and spinal adjustments to correct body alignment. These are all things I now incorporate into my regime. But there are only twenty-four hours in a day. And back in 2008, I simply didn’t have the time. With that six-month clock ticking, I was compelled to devote all available training hours to one of the three specific race disciplines. And I almost never missed a workout. Not because I sought Chris’s approval. But because I was terrified. By mid-summer, my body was beginning to acclimate to the volume, and the hours increased—up to fifteen hours on average, with the occasional eighteen- to twenty-hour week, always followed by a light rest week of easy workouts and reduced volume. It wasn’t until September that the volume escalated to a ceiling of twenty-five hours. But the approach always remained the same—a prescription of steady Z2 medicine. The midweek rides and swims just got a bit longer. I never ran two days in a row—a key reason I was able to avoid a run-related injury—but Tuesdays turned into double-run days. That Saturday ride just got longer and longer. And the same for the Sunday run.

>I also noticed that the more quickly I replenished myself with certain whole foods post-workout, the more rapidly I could rebound for the next session. For example, I added apple cider vinegar to my water to quickly alkalize my system, and I also drank coconut water, which is high in electrolyte trace minerals lost in perspiration. To replenish glycogen, I made sure to eat plenty of complex carbohydrates in the form of sweet potatoes or brown rice. That seemed to work far better than nutrient-poor sources of carbohydrates such as pasta or bread. (Even the gluten-free varieties are processed and leave me feeling heavy and lethargic.) And to combat inflammation and repair free radical damage induced by exercise stress, I amped up my intake of nutrient dense foods high in anti-inflammatory antioxidants like blackberries, blueberries, moringa, and turmeric (the nutrient bioavailability of which is enhanced by adding black pepper), supplemented with adaptogens like reishi and chaga mushroom extracts. Prior to more fully understanding the finer points of subsisting on plants, I was worried about not getting enough protein in my diet to meet the rigors of training. And so large canisters of hemp, soy, brown rice, and pea protein powders began to proliferate in our pantry—along with an array of other muscle development supplements such as L-glutamine, (vegan) creatine, and branch chain amino acids (BCAAs), countless scoops of which would find their way into my post-workout smoothie blends. But over time—and as I furthered my study of the specific protein content of plant-based foods as well as the unique protein needs of the endurance athlete—I began to consider the possibility that I might be overdoing it. I didn’t like ingesting so many highly processed items, many of which are laced with chemical-based coloring and artificial flavoring. And realizing that nutrients in whole foods are always better and more easily absorbed by the body than nutrients in supplement form, I began upping my intake of plant-based whole foods high in protein until I eliminated the majority of these supplements from my diet altogether. I began eating things like quinoa, beans, lentils, peas, and tofu, a product I ultimately swapped for its more nutritious fermented soy-based cousin, tempeh. I also ate a lot of raw almonds, walnuts, cashews, and Brazil nuts, the latter a natural testosterone booster due to its high selenium content. Also on my dietary plate: spirulina, a blue-green algae that is 60 percent protein, complete with all essential amino acids, the highest per-weight protein content of any food on Earth. In taking in all these whole foods, I discovered absolutely no protein-related impediment to my recovery or to my ability to build lean muscle mass. Now fifty-one years old and eleven years Plantpowered, I continue to get stronger and faster with each successive year.

>MANAGING LIFE As the training volume increased, it inevitably encroached on every other area of my life. I was forced to make some serious adjustments in the way I managed my daily routine in order to meet my professional responsibilities, devote the appropriate amount of time to family, and maintain some level of life equilibrium—a sense of normalcy. To be certain, the challenge of completing Ultraman had become very important to me—a mission. But I’m not a professional athlete. Time training meant time not earning. And it also meant, of course, precious hours away from my family. In other words, this mission—even if completed successfully—would be a failure if it came at the cost of my livelihood or intimacy with my wife and kids. No, I wasn’t going to become an absentee husband or father. I’d heard too many stories of amateur endurance athletes who became obsessed with their training, only to end up divorced or disconnected from their children. And after all the pain I’d suffered to build the life I was so grateful to have, there was no way I was going to let that happen. It was time to honestly evaluate how I spent every minute of every day. I scanned for wasted time, inefficient hours, and activities that failed to meet the litmus test of mission critical. Utilizing many of the tools set forth in Timothy Ferriss’s The Four-Hour Workweek, I made some drastic cuts, eventually creating a lifestyle template that forms the underpinnings of how I live and manage time today. On the professional front, I did away with all nonessential networking and business-development lunches, events, and meetings, a favorite Hollywood pastime that always sucked up precious hours and rarely led to new business. Unless it was crucial, I politely declined meeting with clients in person, forcing conversations to the phone. And anything that could be done via e-mail replaced lengthy conference calls. High-maintenance clients who represented low revenue were let go. Hours spent on the freeway commuting were traded whenever possible for the home office or the local Starbucks. I went digital on all fronts, untethering my business from location and always having handy my laptop or iPhone. And because I was self-employed—admittedly, a crucial component in my success equation—I could make creative decisions about when and where I worked, giving me the flexibility to train into the late morning and sometimes mid-afternoon without suffering professional consequences. It was a bargain I generally repaid by drafting deals late into the evening, sometimes pulling all-nighters. And come “rest day” Monday, I typically used the extra time to cram three days of work into one. Because we live in a very remote and rural area far from the locus of my profession, my base was—and to this day remains—my truck. In the run-up to my first Ultraman, my old orange Land Rover Discovery doubled as a mobile office, traveling multisport training unit, and wandering vegan commissary. With a precision that bordered on compulsiveness, each day I packed the vehicle’s rear with all of my work and fitness equipment—my bike attire; a plastic cabinet stocked with cycling parts; a tool kit for repairs; a few pairs of running shoes and my swimming gear; a duffel of clothes to meet any professional, social, or training occasion; a cooler stocked with all the food I needed to fuel my training; plus large jugs of water and sanitary wipes for an impromptu shower after a trail run. Some days it appeared as if I were headed out of town for a week. And I can’t tell you how many grungy gas station bathrooms I used for a quick post-workout wash, changing clothes like a fugitive in preparation for a work meeting.

>With respect to family, on weekends it was typical for Julie to immediately hand me a crying baby or two just as I haggardly returned from a very long ride or run. “Your turn,” she’d say, smiling as she headed to a yoga class or elsewhere. Fair enough. Several hours later it wasn’t unusual to find me juggling children, awash in mayhem, my legs cramping and my still-unshowered body clothed in a sweaty cycling bib—not advisable if you’re prone to saddle sores like I am. When something had to give, it was usually sleep. And the rest of the time, more often than not, it was a workout cut short. In turn, Julie supported me by managing the lion’s share of household responsibilities. But let’s be honest. Juggling twenty-five-hour training weeks while trying to work full-time as a lawyer meant more hours away from my family than I care to admit. Most Saturdays, hours into an absurdly long ride and often so delirious I’d actually lose mental track of which canyon I happened to be climbing, I’d think to myself, You could be at the park right now with the kids like a normal dad. On cold rainy nights when I ran drenched and corpse-like through the dimly lit neighborhood streets, that questioning voice would return: Why are you doing this to yourself? I wish I could say I had the answer. Compensation for my awkward youth perhaps? An effort to manifest swimming dreams unrealized? I’d like to think I was taking middle age to the mat and pinning it into submission. Taking a stand for myself to live intentionally for the first time. Maybe it was all these reasons. Or perhaps none. The only thing I knew with clarity was that a voice deep in my heart continued to chant, Keep going. You’re on the right track. SPIRITUAL RECALIBRATION Come autumn of 2008, four months into my training for Ultraman, I was amazed at just how quickly I was improving. Every Saturday now involved a ride of no fewer than one hundred very hilly miles, followed the next day by at least a marathon distance of running. Then came the first of four progressive race-simulation weekends in which I approximated the Ultraman distances Friday through Sunday, growing longer each weekend. In the first week of October, I completed approximately 80 percent of the Ultraman overall distance, culminating in a forty-mile run along the Pacific Coast Highway from Venice Beach all the way to Point Dume in Malibu. And back. A forty-mile run! It was, without a doubt, up to that point the greatest physical achievement of my life. However, accomplishing these athletic benchmarks came at great cost. My butt ached terribly from saddle sores, undercarriage infections that became so painful I could no longer sit on my bike saddle. After Sunday runs, it took minutes to climb the stairs to my bedroom. And plenty of days I could barely drag my creaky bones out of bed. But the biggest obstacle was only starting to come into focus. Despite my intense efforts to keep all parts of my life working in harmony, our finances began to suffer. Too much focus on Ultraman. Not enough emphasis on generating new business. For the first time in my marriage, the bills began to pile up. Mentally, I began to flog myself. You’re dropping the ball, Rich. The crisis crystallized during my final race-simulation weekend, in early November, just weeks prior to Ultraman. Setting out at 4 A.M. on Saturday for a 130-mile ride, I froze for four hours, until the sun came up, because I couldn’t afford to buy the proper cold-weather gear. And miscalculating my caloric intake, I became delirious just outside Ojai, with no food left when I pulled over at a rickety hamburger stand on a country road in the middle of nowhere. Not only did I not have any cash on hand, my bank account happened to be overdrawn at the time, rendering my ATM card useless. Idiot! Sixty-five miles from home, starving and worse than penniless, I was forced to improvise, my shaking arms dumpster-diving in the garbage bins behind the restaurant for something, anything—to resuscitate my failing body. Rummaging, I inhaled a mélange of old french fries, half-eaten onion rings, and discarded cheeseburgers. A very rare stray from my vegan regime. But desperate times call for desperate measures. In retrospect I should have just asked for some free food, but I was more than embarrassed. Mortified, in fact. The journey home was a meek crawl, requiring every synapse just to remain upright as cold darkness fell and the shakes resumed. But the intense fatigue was nothing compared to my sense of shame. I was in deep despair over how I could have let things go so awry. I’m done with this ridiculous fool’s errand, my brain shrieked as I inched my way home, depleted. I couldn’t bear the thought of my family suffering so I could complete a silly race. We had real-world problems, and as the man of the house, it was up to me to solve them. Then the oddest thing occurred. Pedaling in the dark just miles from home, I began to lose the feeling of the road beneath me. Suddenly my wheels spun freely, and as if Newton’s law of gravity had been revoked, I felt my body effortlessly angle skyward until I was enveloped by nothing but an expansive darkness. At that moment I had a sense of unexplainable oneness with the universe and, also, a sense of joy and gratitude. More than that, actually: a sense of love. I was in a deep meditative state in which my mind became absolutely still, liberated from thought, at peace. It’s what the yogis call samadhi. Later, my gray matter convinced me the experience was nothing more than an exhaustion-fueled hallucination, a delusion precipitated by low blood sugar. It happens. I’ve since been regaled with similar stories from many an ultra athlete. But I couldn’t shake the feeling that I’d experienced something more. Something profound, even. But what did it mean? Julie didn’t hesitate with her perspective. “Can’t you see? You’re being called to step into who you really are,” she whispered, holding my weary head in her warm hands that night. “Money comes and money goes. That’s not the issue. We’ll get through this. But you have to let go of old ways of thinking. Surrender your ego. Because the solution to our problems is in faith. Nothing else matters. Stay strong. And just keep doing what you’re doing.” With those words, Julie gave me a rare and beautiful gift, a potent reminder that when purpose aligns with faith, there can be no failure and all needs will be met—because the universe is infinitely abundant. The next morning I woke up and ran. Forty-five miles. And the following week, more than enough money arrived to pay our bills and finance my excursion to Hawaii for the big race. I’m ready for Ultraman.

>I was inspired by Jason’s example, and yet the first mile that I walked, per Chris’s strategy, virtually every competitor in the field passed me. Do you know how long it takes to walk an entire mile? By the time I reached the half-marathon mark, I was in thirty-second place with only three competitors behind me. It was by far my slowest half marathon ever. “Can I please start running? This is ridiculous!” I pleaded with my crew, exasperated. “No. We stick to the plan,” Chris Uettwiller abruptly replied. But it wasn’t long before this strategy started to pay dividends. With each successive four-mile running interval, I began to pass runners, two to four at a time. When I walked, one of these athletes would again pass me, but not the others. And when I resumed the running, I would pass that person, plus two to three more. Again and again. Leapfrogging my way up the field. And that’s when I started to believe. By the time I reached the first marathon marker—the day’s halfway point—I had negative-split the course. In other words, the last thirteen miles were covered much faster than the first. But more important, I felt fresh, my legs springy, my mood bright, my vigor surging. With many runners beginning to falter, I thought, Only twenty-six miles left? No problem! By mile thirty, the plan had proved its merit. And then some. As predicted, athletes could be seen in the distance ahead, crumpled over and staggering. The Queen K Highway is so straight and long, I could spot runners a full half mile ahead, fuzzy oases of blurred color against the black backdrop of baking pavement and lava. I’d laser in on the next athlete in front of me, then challenge myself to pass before my four-mile spurt would end. And generally I’d do it. “Who’s next?” I’d ask the crew. Then I’d reel my competitor in. But fifty-two miles is still fifty-two miles. And the Kona heat is still the Kona heat. Just past the forty-mile marker, I began to falter. Even the slightest external stimuli proved too much. Something as simple as raising an arm to drink, or the sight of Chris or LW running alongside me, became overwhelming. The blinders came down and there were simply no energy reserves for a single thought or movement not mission critical. With my systems shutting down, I was now reluctant to even slightly alter my running pace, let alone walk, fearful that if I broke stride, I’d be unable to resume—or, worse yet, that I’d quit. And so with eight miles remaining, I resolved to run straight to the finish or until my body gave out altogether, whichever came first. Every cell in my brain implored my body to stop. And so I tried to focus on the journey that had brought me here—everything I’d sacrificed for this moment. All for naught if I quit now, I thought. No, there was no way I was stopping. So I sped up, reaching into my deepest reserves for the physical energy and mental acumen to pick up the pace and finish strong. Done.

>Just outside of Ojai, I was pedaling strong, about 70 miles into my first 130-mile ride of the season, energized by the power I was feeling in my legs and pondering excitedly what the season might bring. Then something went terribly wrong. I have no memory of what exactly transpired, but my next recollection was of slowly awakening from a total blackout. Tangled in the spokes of my bike, bloodied and unable to move, I opened my eyes to peer up through blurred vision at two elderly ladies coming to my aid. What happened? “Call an ambulance!” commanded a voice. A crash, I realized. But how? Somehow I’d gone over my handlebars—hit an unforeseen bump in the road, perhaps. Or simply lost my balance. It doesn’t take much. But I couldn’t remember anything. And then everything went black. My next impression was coming to in the hospital, confused by my surroundings and searching for clues until I slowly realized it was Julie and my then five-year-old daughter, Mathis, leaning over my bedside. Squinting up at them, I began tearing up, a frail sense of mortality coming into focus and overpowering my emotions. I’d suffered a severe concussion, but my disfigured face had borne the brunt of the impact. With my nose mangled and my lips split wide open and monstrously swollen, Mathis had to turn away. To this day, I still have no feeling in my lower lip. But I was lucky, the doctor said. I could have easily snapped my neck. Convalescing in that hospital bed, I couldn’t help but once again call into question the course I’d set for myself. Physically I was broken. Financial struggles continued to plague me. I was at a crossroads professionally. And spiritually, I suddenly felt lost. Taking note of my distress, Julie leaned down, kissed my forehead, and presented me with a question. The question. “So if that was it, would you be satisfied with how you’d pursued your life?” I grew quiet, digging deep for a response. The bizarre mash-up of unexpected public accolades and private struggles exacerbated my disorientation. On the one hand, I seemed to be risking death—though prior to the crash I hadn’t thought of it that way. Yet when the crash occurred, there was no doubt that I was doing what I loved. As I lay there, looking into Julie’s eyes, I knew the answer. “Yes.” Most spouses probably would have pleaded for a return to a more secure existence: life with a nine-to-five husband, two weeks of annual vacation, and barbecues on the weekend. There’s nothing inherently wrong with that. But that’s not Julie. And I wasn’t ready to accept that either. “I’m so happy to hear you say that,” she murmured. Because she understood what I was only then coming to realize—that safety isn’t just an illusion, it’s a cop-out. I know it sounds trite, but there’s simply nothing like a near-death experience to remind one of the impermanence of everything. And living imprisoned by fear only to die with regret over dreams postponed was a life neither of us was interested in.
Chapter Ten: Epic5: Rookie Mistakes, Burning Skies, Kahuna Spirits, and a Drunken Angel in the Pain Cave of the Real Hawaii

>As I described at this book’s outset, in the fall of 2009 I returned to the Ultraman World Championships, leading the race pillar to post for almost eight straight hours to seize the Day One victory with authority—by a full ten minutes, in fact. For the first time in my athletic life, I was no longer the also-ran—that second-place guy who just couldn’t quite get on top. Finally, at age forty-three, I’d shed that burden and won something. Something big. But Day Two found me bloodied and battered, flat on my face, limbs strewn across Hawaii’s Red Road. My bike was trashed. I was entirely alone. And I could barely move, my knee immobile. It seemed a given that the race was over for me. But it wasn’t. Lifted by the ohana of fellow crews, a first-aid kit, the miraculous donation of a brand-new pedal, and the encouragement of Julie and Tyler, I got back on the bike. At that point, I wasn’t in a race against my competitors, but rather myself. It was a hard-fought battle just to complete those 170 miles with a raw, throbbing shoulder and a knee that screamed in agony with each successive stroke. When I finally pedaled into the town of Hawi to mark the end of Day Two, I collapsed in a heap on the warm dewy grass just past the finish line, in tears not just of pain but of powerful emotion at having found the wherewithal to somehow see the day through. And even at that, I had one more ordeal to overcome. It was on the last day of the race—a double marathon run that I doubted I could even attempt, let alone complete, given my horribly swollen knee—that I experienced the most suffering I’d ever felt on a run up to that time. Baking in the irrepressible heat of the Kona lava fields, dehydrated and body failing, I cursed the race, the crash, myself, the world. That’s when suddenly I recalled a David Goggins quote I’d read years back—the idea that when you believe you’ve reached your absolute limit, you’ve only tapped into about 40 percent of what you’re truly capable of. The barrier isn’t the body. It’s the mind. Then I found myself thinking about what Julie had said to me, just before the race started that morning: “Remember, it’s already done. All you have to do now is show up. Stay present. And show us who you really are.” Show us who you really are.

>When asked if I regret “the crash,” my answer is an emphatic no! To me, it was the perfect race. And I wouldn’t change a thing. Because when I crossed that finish line, I finally reached the starting line in becoming the person I was always meant to be. My best, most authentic self. A self-actualization that had nothing to do with time or podiums—and had everything to do with character. And yet I couldn’t help but wonder: Is this it? Will I ever top this feeling, ever top this performance? I couldn’t know then that an even more arduous test was waiting in my future.

>We were finally released by TSA, and Jason and I made a frantic sprint for our flight, our depleted bodies hauling our bikes and bags, straining through this final unofficial Day One challenge. With one minute to spare, we arrived at the gate just as the doors on our flight were closing. Finally seated, we burst out laughing, only then realizing that we were both still wearing our cycling kits, our stenchy spandex fouling the cabin. But we didn’t care. Day One was in the books. We’d done it. “That’s why it’s called a challenge, Roll-Dawg!” Next up, Oahu.

>I shook my head, then immediately regretted that I’d wasted dwindling reserves on anything negative. Not helpful, I thought. Why are you playing the victim? We’re all tired…I strained to affect a positive attitude. But inside, all I could think was This is beyond ridiculous. Jason had become a man of very few words—perhaps his means of conserving every ounce of energy for the demands ahead. Or maybe like me, he knew it was just better to keep any fear or negativity to himself, to submerge it below his poker-face exterior. When I looked at him, all I heard in my mind was his mantra, That’s why it’s called a challenge. As if I could forget. Our eyes locked again, the absurdity of the moment percolating to the surface. We both wanted to complain, but we bit our tongues. And the most unlikely thing occurred. We both burst into uncontrollable, exhaustion-fueled laughter, giggling like teenage girls. Catharsis. The only appropriate response. And a better pain salve than a morphine drip.

>I locked in on the mile markers peppering the road, counting down….T-minus three miles…two miles…one mile…half a mile…But with the beach within our grasp, Paul leaned out the window of our crew van to let us know that we were still well shy of our 112-mile bike goal—we’d need to overshoot the beach and keep going for another four miles and U-turn back. Eight more miles?!?!? It couldn’t be true. But a quick check on my bike computer verified it. Normally, I could tack an extra eight miles onto a long ride just as easily as I could brush my teeth. But today was far from normal. I was now officially at my breaking point. Had I been a spy detained in Guantánamo, I would have happily divulged every state secret I held just to get off that bike. I actually began to cry. Don’t let anyone see. Head down. Tears mixed with sweat from my brow stung my half-blind eyes as I strained to keep focus on the white line of the road. Just make it to the next mile marker. What followed was interim goals measured in yards…then feet. Those last eight miles were an eternity. And forget about the marathon that we were scheduled to do after this! Clearly, that wasn’t going to happen. Not in my state of mind, body, and spirit. I knew Jason would agree. We’d somehow complete this ride. But that was it. We’d given it a solid try, but there was no way running shoes would find their way onto my feet tonight. Maybe we could think about it after a decent night’s rest, but not tonight. No way, no how. As we finally—and quite gingerly—coasted into the beach parking lot just past 10:00 P.M., I’d firmly decided on behalf of both Jason and myself that the evening marathon was officially canceled. As our crew greeted me, I unclipped from my pedals, somehow managed to rear my leg over the bike’s top tube, and just let the bike drop to the ground. Fine by me if I never saw that steaming heap of carbon fiber ever again. In a daze, I stumbled right past Jason, Rebecca, Molly, and Paul, making my way directly to the public shower, where I steadied myself by leaning against the tile wall under a stream of hot water, still fully clothed. For fifteen minutes, I rinsed the grime, salt, tears, and pain from my worn-out body and watched it circle the drain, mesmerized. Enveloped in the much-needed shower stream, I was consumed with one thought only: I’m done. I didn’t care that I wouldn’t finish the day or that we’d fall shy of what had now become, thanks to social media, a relatively public goal. I knew that I’d given it everything I had, left it all out on the island. I could be happy with that, I guess. The truth is, in that moment, I really didn’t care. I didn’t need this. After all, I’m forty-three years old. I have a law practice I’ve been ignoring. What am I trying to prove? I’d done enough. I needed my wife. I missed my kids terribly. And for now, all I wanted was a pillow, some fresh sheets, and oblivion. Firming my resolve to get to the hotel as soon as possible, I got out of the shower, grabbed a towel, and inched my creaking bones to join Jason, sitting on the open-hatched rear bumper of the crew van, head slung low, covered in a wet towel. Together we sat at this makeshift altar, saying nothing. Rebecca approached, breaking the silence with a question that had something to do with socks. But before she could finish, Jason cut her off. “Don’t talk to me right now.” Thank you. Of course, it wasn’t Rebecca’s fault. As always, she was anticipating our needs, anxious to help. But the energy required to even listen to someone, let alone field a question, was overwhelming. Nothing else needed to be said to clarify that we were finished for the night, and I knew Jason felt the same way, without a doubt. Ten more minutes passed. Paul, Rebecca, and Molly hovered nearby. Not a word was uttered. Jason and I both understood what needed to be said, but neither of us wanted to be the one to say it out loud. Fearful of passing out, I regained some balance by opening my eyes and staring blankly toward the ocean. Obscured in total darkness, the rhythmic sound of the waves hypnotized me, freezing time and thought. But my excursion into intoxicated exhaustion was interrupted by the very real and sudden appearance of a woman, emerging from the black nowhere of the beach beyond. Stumbling and looking haggard beyond her true years, she shuffled barefoot toward us until she stood directly before our group, fully illuminated below the glow of the halogen streetlamp above. A teal tank top and brightly colored board shorts barely covered her leathery, sun-damaged skin as a small brown paper bag dangled from her grip. Back and forth, her eyes scanned our family of rag-tag endurance junkies and I could see the wheels of her brain turning—who are these crazy people and what are they doing here in the middle of the night? A moment passed, then she walked right up to me until she was standing directly above, meeting my bedraggled state with her bloodshot, tractor-beam gaze. Uh-oh, was all I could think, desperate for her to move on and leave us to our misery. Then, in a state as incoherent as mine, she scrutinized me bluntly and abruptly slurred, “Hey, man, you wanna party?” Great. Just what I needed. A drunk woman. “Maybe some other time,” I managed to mutter, avoiding her glance in the hope that she’d move along. “Suit yourself.” She groused in that distinctive rasp native to the veteran alcoholic, and wandered off in search of a partner in crime. But it was enough to break the silence. Putting an end to this chapter, Jason reared up off the bumper, turned to look me in the eye, and said, “Okay, big bro.” Thank God, I thought. That hotel bed just got closer. “Go get your shoes,” he said. “Time to run.” What?! He can’t be serious! Instantly, my mind raced with all the excuses I wanted to make, all the obvious reasons that this was a bad idea. Instead, I was mute. And oddly, my thoughts turned back to the drunk woman. A flood of emotion welled up inside me as I realized that, shy of the grace that had come my way twelve years prior, I could very easily be living her life, staggering around lost and alone, impossibly drunk. We’re not so different, that woman and I. In that moment it dawned on me that she wasn’t just some random drunk. Instead, she was an angel, divinely dispatched to remind me of how far I had come. From that lost soul careening into oblivion—hoping to die but unable to live—to a man now fully engaged in life, meeting reality head-on in the grips of this most fantastic adventure. Overcome by a groundswell of gratitude, I pondered an inarguable truth: By the grace of a mysterious power far greater than myself, my life had been twice spared. First, through sobriety. And second, by virtue of my plant-based lifestyle and love for endurance sports. My thoughts then turned to all the naysayers who needled me for irresponsibly chasing this impossible fool’s errand. Then to my grandfather Richard Spindle, the man I was deprived of ever meeting but with whom I shared so much in common. A man I have no doubt would have championed my efforts to do something extraordinary. And in that moment I could feel his presence, a second angel, sitting alongside me and urging me forward. My final thought turned to Navy SEAL David Goggins, a third angel for igniting my passion for ultra-endurance. And ping-ponging across my throbbing brain was his famous mantra that had become my refrain: When you think you’re done, you’ve only tapped into 40 percent of what you are truly capable of. Lightning-struck by these epiphanies, what followed was the impossible. In sheer defiance of the laws of physics and biology, I somehow slowly raised my body up to meet Jason’s pensive, thousand-yard stare. And then…blackout. A fugue state in which time folded in on itself, and from which no memory escaped. Five baffling minutes later I regained awareness, finding myself mysteriously adorned in a new pair of shorts and compression socks, lacing up my running shoes and ready to run. Clearly, I hadn’t passed out. I just have absolutely no recollection of doing any of this under my own power. Without a doubt, this was the defining moment of EPIC5. And one of the defining moments of my forty-five years. Getting up off that car bumper to stare down a marathon was the hardest thing I’ve ever done in my entire life. Yet I didn’t do anything. All self-will had drained from me. My resolve had evaporated, replaced with delirium. So what did happen? Somehow, a switch was flicked. But not by me, this I know. The energy to get off that bumper could only have come from something beyond the self. Bliss in depletion. I finally got it. It’s that beautiful place of ascetic purity that is permitted to bloom only when the mind is stopped dead in its tracks and everything else is stripped away, leaving your soul—or who you really are—to forge a connection with the truth.

>Jason and I began our marathon with a step, rounding into a walk. As we went, we ate almond butter sandwiches and took in copious amounts of fluids, slowly restoring some life to the legs that would now have to propel us 26.2 miles in darkness. “We got all night, bro. Who cares how long it takes. If we have to walk the entire thing, then so be it.”

>Goals are great. Especially big goals. But one should set such goals for a well-reasoned purpose and with conscious intention. Without this, the goal serves as a mere salve for some intangible, unexplored emotional discomfort. Such a person will likely fail in his or her quest to achieve that goal. And even should he or she succeed, chances are it was the wrong goal to begin with. As Joseph Campbell, mythologist and author of The Hero’s Journey once famously wrote, “One can spend one’s whole life climbing the ladder, only to realize it’s been placed against the wrong wall.” If you’re not in touch with a personally meaningful rationale to support your aspiration, a logic in league with your unique song, then how can you possibly know if this the best allocation of your precious time and energy? Without this awareness, you very well may succeed in achieving the goal, only to awake years later to discover it’s not really what you want at all. Case in point: I thought I wanted to be a lawyer. Although I never honestly mined my heart’s song, I nonetheless convinced myself of this truth. Consequently, I spent the next two decades trying to jam a square peg into a round hole, pursuing a career so utterly at odds with my fundamental personality it was obvious to everyone except myself that I had chosen the wrong road. And so, even in success, I failed. My point is that before you decide on the what, you need to know your why. To know your why, you need to know yourself. And that, my friends, is an inside job. But where to begin? I wish I could give you a list of 10 simple and concrete things to do that will change your life. Unfortunately, it doesn’t work that way. The journey to greater self-awareness, to greater self-actualization is life-long pursuit of infinite complexity. It’s messy because we are creatures driven (both consciously and unconsciously) by a matrix of complex emotions far more than we are motivated by logic and rationality. Ignoring or denying the extent to which emotions predict behavior—and by this I mean the stories and experiences that form the construct of identity—isn’t helping us. It’s hurting us. Because it denies what actually drives, motivates, and compels behavior—behaviors we perpetrate beyond the realm of choice. If logic carried the day, we would always act in our self-interest. Do the right thing. And flawlessly execute our plans. But that is not the nature of the human animal. Instead, we act based upon our often irrational emotional reactions to people, places, and things. In response to an identity formed by past experiences and stories we tell ourselves about who we are, what we are capable of and not capable of, most of which is pure illusion. And all too often, this leads us in a direction we don’t want to go. Failing to deal with the psychology behind what drives us is a roadmap for failure. This is not to say that there are not many tools that will help you. And I will be imparting those in the pages that follow. But it’s important to understand and embrace the idea that there is a deeper, more meaningful challenge ahead. Equal parts battle and ballet, this journey is not for the faint of heart. No, this is a warrior’s path. It requires courage. It is difficult, and without destination. But it’s also the most beautiful, rewarding dance imaginable. This process is about mining your interior to deepen your relationship with yourself. It’s about confronting, and ultimately overcoming, behaviors and thought patterns that do not serve you. It’s about reframing the story we tell ourselves about ourselves, to tell a new story altogether. It’s also about exploring the quality of your relationships with others—changing the way you think about the world around you, and your responsibility to the greater welfare of your fellow man, and the planet at large. And finally, it’s about service—refocusing your attention away from what you can get, to what you can contribute. All told, it’s about waking up. No, I cannot prescribe a universal roadmap. But I can share my experience, and a few fundamental truths to light your path. Truths I did not invent, but stumbled upon and practice imperfectly as I continue to trudge this path forward in search of broadening a life underscored by authenticity, personal meaning, purpose, and social responsibility.

>Of course, most people reading this are not alcoholics or drug addicts. But it’s important to understand that addiction is also a spectrum. In my opinion, everybody (yes, everybody) struggles silently with some form of unhealthy, compulsive dependence. I’m not talking about just drugs and alcohol. I’m taking about anything and everything that holds sway over the soundness of your everyday decision-making. Food, sex, gambling, pornography, relationships, work, shopping, television, sugar, video games, social media, approval, exercise, texting while driving, drama, love, hoarding, overachieving, underachieving, victimhood, perfectionism, sexting, and yes, as crazy as it may sound, even self-help (if this is you, stop reading this book now). I could keep going. But you get the drift. I’m confident that should you summon the courage to conduct an honest and fearless personal inventory of your habits and behaviors—something I highly recommend for everyone—chances are you will identify a behavior, a substance, or a mental construct you feel some degree of powerlessness to arrest. Maybe you never gave it a second thought. Perhaps you reconcile it as harmless. Or as a good and reliable friend, always there in your time of need. But this is not your friend. It does not serve you. It is a misstep in the ballet you are choreographing. Indeed, it is an enemy on the battlefield of self-actualization.

>MORNING ROUTINES It has become quite popular in recent years to mine the morning habits and practices of high achievers. There is a good reason for this. The series of behaviors you engage in first thing each day sets the stage and mood for how the rest of your day will play out. If you approach this precious time with mindfulness, it will focus your intention, marshal the day’s energies, improve how you navigate challenges, enhance your interactions with others, and bring a Technicolor hue to your life experience. Morning routines vary wildly for these high achievers. Some wake up at 4:00 A.M. without fail. Others arise when their body says it’s time, prioritizing their eight hours of rest. Some hit the gym immediately upon waking, while others spend this valuable time in quiet reflection, in meditation, journaling, writing, or immersed in a creative pursuit. But there is one thing that none of these people do. None of them meet the day by unconsciously reacting to their environment. They don’t arise hurried or rushed. They’re not flipping on the news or reaching impulsively for their phone to check e-mail or Instagram. In a word, they’re not distracting themselves with matters inconsequential. Instead, they honor this time. They take it seriously. They meet it with mindful intention. There is something sacred about the early hours. It’s that time when all is quiet. Nobody is trying to reach you. The world is asleep, leaving you with a gift—an invaluable, almost priceless opportunity to pause, reflect, and be present for your life. To engage your creative mind. To set the intention for not only the hours that follow, but also the life you wish to experience. All before confronting the responsibilities and demands your day will undoubtedly present. Here’s my routine: Sleep. Experience has taught me that I operate best with eight hours. So I ensure that I get it. It’s non-negotiable. Period. But sleep can be a struggle for me. As I age, shut-eye doesn’t always come easy. So, to prepare for maximum restfulness, my morning routine begins the night before. To calm myself, I enjoy a concoction specifically designed to promote relaxation—a cup of warm water laced with magnesium plus a mix of reishi mushroom powder and Ashwaganda root (two adaptogens that reduce anxiety and promote sleep). I put my devices aside, and whenever possible, it’s lights out at 9 P.M. I almost never set an alarm, but arise refreshed at around 5 A.M. Tea. Upon waking, I prepare tea, usually Chinese Pu’erh, a fermented variety high in antioxidant polyphenols. I sit in a quiet spot and enjoy it in solitude. Meditation. Next up is twenty minutes of meditation. A practice that has completely transformed my life, I could write an entire book on the subject. But suffice it to say that meditation has become an essential component in my success equation. An exercise in quieting the chatter of the monkey mind, it roots me in consciousness. It’s a practice that has allowed me to be more present in my life, less reactive to my surroundings, and more mindful of my path and priorities. There are countless methods to explore. If you’re new to meditation and not sure where to begin, there are several fantastic mobile apps that will help get you started. I suggest Headspace, 10% Happier, or Calm. You might also enjoy my podcast conversations with meditation authorities like Sharon Salzberg, Andy Puddicombe (co-founder of Headspace), WuDe, Jason Garner, or Dan Harris, author of 10% Happier (a fun memoir and great primer on the benefits of meditation) and creator of the app by the same name. Writing and Journaling. I then spend the next phase of my morning intimately acquainting myself with pen and paper. Because my creative energy peaks in the early hours, I find it critical that I leverage these precious hours for the benefit of the page. But never the keyboard. Writing longhand forces me to slow down. And somehow (again), it makes it more real. More potent. Sometimes it’s just ten minutes spent jotting down random thoughts. An idea for a blog post. A podcast guest I’d like to book. An emotion I am struggling with. A list of things I’m grateful for. Other times I will spend thirty-odd minutes on what Julia Cameron in her book The Artist’s Way calls “morning pages”—three single-spaced longhand pages on whatever happens to come to mind, totally unedited. It’s a practice I have been doing ever since I got sober, and has been instrumental in mining my psyche, connecting me with self, unlocking creativity, and conceptualizing the life I want to live. I highly recommend everyone get this book and undertake her program. Other times, such as when I’m actively working on a book, my writing period could last two to three hours, or even up to noon (as it is at the moment of writing this very sentence). Of course, I make part of my living as a writer and understand that this is unique. I’m not saying this is what you should do; it’s just what I do. Morning Smoothie. Meditation and journaling complete, my next step is a green smoothie (see Appendix III for some favorite recipes). Movement. Whenever possible, I prefer to train in the morning—a run, ride, or swim—generally after getting the kids up and taking them to school. Not only does this attend to my physical well-being, it’s an active meditation practice that provides the space and mental quietude to supplement and mindfully contemplate the thoughts penned earlier that morning. Upon completion, I am clear, reinvigorated, and armed to tackle the day. That’s great, Rich. But I don’t have that kind of time.

>CONSTRUCTING THE ROADMAP If you don’t have a goal, you can’t score. But a goal without a plan is useless. Calendaring. Successful pursuit of any goal demands a well-considered roadmap that plots a deliberate course toward your ultimate objective. Once you have identified your goal, the first order of business is to create a lock-step process to achieve it, working backward from Z to A. So the first order of business is to get one of those big paper desktop calendars—the ones with a large page for each month, and a box for each day. Can I use my computer calendar? Well, you can. But I wouldn’t. Again, there is something inherent about the tactile experience of longhand that holds mysterious powers. That and the fact it will be sitting on your desk, staring at you all the time. Then flip to the ultimate goal deadline date you have already established. Mark it in red. For illustration, let’s say your goal is to complete the NYC Marathon. This would mean denoting the race on the specific date in November. Reverse mapping. Working backward from that November deadline, break down the ultimate goal into periodic stepping-stone goals—smaller, achievable milestones peppered throughout the calendar at regular intervals. These stepping-stone goals will serve as guideposts to measure progress toward the ultimate goal. Mark each stepping-stone goal in blue. To continue the marathon example: About two to three weeks before the big race, you should complete a 20-mile run. Put it on the calendar. Now backtrack a month and add “15 mile run” on the calendar in the corresponding date box. Now backtrack another month and jot down “12 mile run.” You get the picture. The next step is to fill in the boxes that live between the stepping-stones. With green pen, mark each day with the thing that absolutely must be accomplished to keep you on track to achieve the next stepping-stone and the ultimate goal at large. The smaller and more easily digestible each little task, the better. The only rule is that they methodically drive you in the direction you want to go to achieve that goal expeditiously and on schedule. I would encourage you to be conservative with your daily must-dos. Don’t try to accomplish too much too soon, especially when tackling terrain without any previous experience. The ego never fails to overestimate what we can do in a day while our knots consistently underestimate what we can do in a year. This mindset can lead to burnout or failure. The idea is to render the whole process manageable by removing focus from the enormous, seemingly impossible task of achieving the big goal to instead laser in on the daily digestible micro-goals. In other words, once you have your roadmap from A to Z, forget about Z altogether. All you need concern yourself with is getting from A to B. Then from B to C. And so on. Baby steps, taken consistently and relentlessly, move mountains. Trite I know. But so true. For certain types of goals (particularly fitness) there are many wonderful productivity programs, mobile apps, and social media platforms that can aid in structuring your roadmap and holding you accountable. For a list of my favorites, see Appendix V. This strategy is powerful. It demystifies the process. It also breeds confidence. Every day you check that box is a victory. Pat yourself on the back. Every stepping-stone you achieve is a triumph. Celebrate. As you progress through the weeks and months ahead in lockstep with your timeline, the impossibility of accomplishing your goal suddenly fades. Despite treading uncertain waters, doubt is replaced with self-assurance, and fear with enthusiasm. Done right, by the time you arrive at Z—the ultimate goal—it will no longer seem impossible. It’s just another day. One more simple box to check. Because you’ve done the work, success is a foregone conclusion. The only thing left to do is show up. Execute. Enjoy the fruits of your labor. And celebrate the journey that delivered you to this place. Speaking from experience, undertaking this process to emerge victorious will fundamentally change your sense of personal potential. And it will forever alter your perspective on your innate capabilities. Decision fatigue. The importance of creating an effective roadmap to achieve your goals cannot be overstated. But one of the more undervalued benefits of this strategy is that it removes something called decision fatigue, which refers to the deteriorating quality of decisiveness after a long session of decision-making. Again, most people burn out and fail because they haven’t constructed a concrete architecture to specifically dictate what is to be done, where, when, and why. As a result, decisions regarding the priority of a particular day’s actions are often reactive, and not well considered. Let’s take triathlon as an example. Your race is in six weeks. Perhaps you are “training” most days, albeit without a specific plan. Who needs a plan? I’m pretty fit. So each day you awake to a decision tree with infinite permutations. Should I run today or swim? How long? Maybe I can cancel that lunch. But then Bob will be pissed. Okay, I guess I’ll take today off and hit it hard tomorrow. Oh wait, it’s back-to-school day. These irrational trade-offs lead us astray. They’re exhausting. They lead to poor decisions and often indecision altogether. Analysis paralysis. Eradicate decision fatigue by constructing a rock-solid plan. Prioritize it. Better yet, when life allows, create an impermeable boundary around it. And do not waver. This way, all your decisions are already made. The thinking mind is not required, free to focus its energies where it is most needed. There is only do or do not. Configure your schedule to ensure you consistently choose “do.”

>MOOD FOLLOWS ACTION Even when fueled by purpose and infused with a strong sense of personal meaning, there will be times you struggle to face the day’s obligations and responsibilities. Motivation will wane. Inspiration will fail you. Days of weakness will visit. I too hit that wall. On such days I find myself thinking, I’ll just do it later. I’ll get to it when I feel better. Unfortunately, this never works. If I wait until I feel like doing something, I usually just keep waiting. Inert. I may never feel like it. If and when I do, the moment has already passed. This impulse need not dictate behavior. The path forward is to understand one essential truth: mood follows action. Taking action, even if it’s just sitting up in bed, drives changes in your emotional state—not the other way around. In other words, how you feel about doing something need not impede the deed. Feelings are just that—feelings. Messy emotions that all too often get in the way, obscure clarity and prevent us from moving forward. Even if you feel like they are going to kill you, they won’t. Heeding their call is a choice you have the power to decline. You simply cannot think your way into acting differently. You cannot feel your way into behavior change. These strategies will fail you every time. Instead, mute the idle chatter of the mind that keeps you stuck. Decline the impulse to indulge your low-grade emotional state. And just take action. Because what matters is what you do, not necessarily how you feel about the doing. There have been plenty of times I didn’t want to go out and run. Just putting my shoes on felt like an impossible chore. But once I’m out the door, the resistance quickly fades. And never once have I returned from such a run thinking that was a bad idea. Instead I’m refreshed. By taking action in the face of emotional opposition, I am revitalized. And my mood is renewed. Mood follows action. It’s a simple yet profound mantra I rely upon daily to successfully combat psychic resistance. Adopt it. Put it to work. And watch your watermark rise.

>If you only have thirty minutes to exercise rather than an hour, don’t abandon the workout all together because it doesn’t measure up to your scheduled ideal. Instead, squeeze the most out of that half-hour. If circumstances dictate you must stray a bit from your preferred nutritional regimen or starve, it’s okay. Do what you have to. Take the next best action, and then move on. It’s fine. Because the goal isn’t perfection, it’s consistent forward progress.

>That being said, during periods of heavy training, when I’m feeling unduly fatigued, or on days I know I haven’t ingested enough high-protein plant-based foods, I’ll include a modest amount of plant-based protein powder in my daily post-workout smoothie as a supplemental safeguard. When I do, I prefer organic hemp protein, one of the few plant-based foods that contains a complete amino acid profile. However, hemp isn’t the most bioavailable plant-based protein, meaning the body cannot fully assimilate all its nutrients. Through experimentation I have found that it is best used when combined with a variety of other more bioavailable plant-based proteins such as pea, sprouted brown rice, or sacha inchi, a seed native to the Amazon rainforest dubbed the “Incan Peanut.” And I always include spirulina in my smoothie blends. Boasting a protein content of 60–65 percent by weight (higher than any other natural food source on Earth), this fresh-water algae phytonutrient superfood is an optimal and complete protein source.

>Still not convinced? Consider this: some of the fiercest animals in the world—the elephant, rhino, hippo, and gorilla all have one thing in common—they are herbivores who get 100 percent of their protein from plants. And nobody asks them where they get their protein.

>NUTRIENTS: GET DENSE AND BLEND Another key component of the Plantpower Diet is nutrient density. At least twice a day I prepare a primarily greens-based smoothie drink. Although a standard blender will suffice if your budget is tight, I strongly urge you to upgrade to a premium high-powered model. I prefer the Vitamix. It’s pricey, but worth every penny. In fact, it’s the one kitchen item I simply can’t do without.*4 Neither the Vitamix nor its rival, the Blendtec, are your garden-variety blenders. With motors that could power a Jet Ski, these machines can literally make juice out of just about anything. How powerful? Using the top-of-the-line Vitamix, I once blended an avocado pit and drank it. Please don’t do this. In the morning, I pack this turbocharged machine with a variety of plant-based foods to kick-start my metabolism and provide lasting energy for the day. The foundation is always a combination of dark leafy greens high in alkalizing chlorophyll to aid in cell regeneration—foods like kale, spinach, swiss chard, spirulina, and marine phytoplankton. Plus, I add endurance boosters like beetroot, chia seeds, and maca powder, a rotation of avocado, coconut, and hemp seeds high in essential fatty acids, and blackberries and acai for antioxidants. Pepita (pumpkin) seeds provide extra iron, and bell pepper and citrus fruit provide vitamin C, which enhances the body’s ability to absorb the iron. And if the blend is too bitter, I add a small amount of orange or apple juice for flavor. But I never overdo it on fruit juices; after pasteurization they’re essentially zapped of much of their nutritional value and are devoid of fiber, leaving mostly sugar.

>I’m talking about blackberries, blueberries, strawberries, acai and goji berries, moringa, spinach, kale, carrots, and spirulina. I’ll also think about eating some walnuts for protein and drinking coconut water for electrolytes. And when I crave dessert, instead of ice cream or pie I’ll try blending banana and berries with coconut milk and cacao—a chocolate-flavored nutritious superfood high in antioxidants. A guilt-free delight.