# Focus
Author: Leo Babauta  
[Amazon](https://amzn.to/2VxjlyW)  
[Goodreads](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/9549534-focus)  

>“Smile, breathe and go slowly.” –Thich Nhat Hanh

>And yet, at the heart of this simple book lies the key to many of the struggles we face these days, from being productive and achieving our goals, to getting healthy and fit in the face of fast food and inactivity, to finding simplicity and peace amidst chaos and confusion. That key is itself simple: focus. Our ability to focus will allow us to create in ways that perhaps we haven’t in years. It’ll allow us to slow down and find peace of mind. It’ll allow us to simplify and focus on less —on the essential things, the things that matter most.

>It’s an Addiction There’s instant positive feedback to such constant activities as checking email, surfing the web, checking social networks such as blogs, forums, Twitter and Facebook. That’s why it’s so easy to become addicted to being connected and distracted.

>All the reading and consumption of information we do, all the communicating we do, and all the switching between modes we do —it all takes away from the time we have to create. We should note that communicating and consuming information aren’t necessarily evil to the person who creates: they actually help. We 15 shouldn’t throw them out completely. Communicating with others allows us to collaborate, and that actually multiplies our creative power, in my experience. When you communicate and collaborate, you bounce ideas off people, get ideas from things they say, learn from each other, combine ideas in new and exciting ways, build things that couldn’t be possible from one person. When you consume information, you’re helping your creativity as well —you find inspiration in what others have done, you get ideas, you gather the raw materials for creating. But consuming and communicating aren’t creating. They aid creating, they lay the groundwork, but at some point we need to actually sit down and create. Or stand up and create. But create. How to Beat Distraction, and Create If the problem is that these separate processes of creating, consuming and communicating get in the way of each other, the solution is obvious: we need to separate the processes. We need to create at different times than we consume and communicate. I know, easier said than done. But that’s what the rest of this book will be about: how to separate these processes. Because in the end, when you separate them, you’ll free up your time and mind for creating, and create better and more prodigiously than ever before.

>But it’s important to get away from these constant distractions —we need some quiet, some time to reflect and contemplate, some time for solitude. Without it, our minds are constantly bombarded by information and sensations, unable to rest.

>We need the rest. It’s important in ways we don’t often think about. We need to de-stress, and we need to recharge our mental batteries. Quiet and solitude and reflection lead to greater happiness when they’re a part of our daily lives, at least in some degree. What you do during this time —read, write, run, nap, sit, watch, listen, even have a quiet conversation, play, study, build —isn’t as important as the simple fact of having that time of disconnection.

>“Without great solitude no serious work is possible.” –Pablo Picasso

>It’s not technology we should be afraid of. It’s a life where we’re always connected, always interrupted, always distracted, always bombarded with information and requests. It’s a life where we have no time to create, or connect with real people.

>“Nature does not hurry, yet everything is accomplished.” –Lao Tzu

>We might miss out on an opportunity. Possibly. There are always going to be opportunities we miss. But more likely are the opportunities we’re missing because we’re letting our days be consumed by trying to stay up to date. When we do this, we lose time we could be using to pursue exciting, real opportunities.

>There’s a concept in Taoism, “wei wu wei”, which is often translated as “action without action” or “effortless doing”. I prefer to think of it more in the sense of “action that does not involve struggle or excessive effort”. This is an important concept, because effortless action is a way to not only achieve focus in a world of chaos, but to be effective without stress, to respond to any situation with economy of effort and action, and to pursue our passions while beating procrastination.

>Be like water An appropriate mental image is that of water, which seems naturally effortless in its action. It isn’t necessarily still, nor is it passive, but it flows naturally around obstacles and always gets to where it’s going. This is effortless action. It uses gravity and the natural contours of its landscape, instead of forcing things. Water can never be anything but effortless, and yet it is quietly powerful. 71 Be like water. Flow, respond to the landscape, move around obstacles, and be graceful in your movement.

>...here’s the thing with goals: you’re never satisfied. Goals are a way of saying, “When I’ve accomplished this goal (or all these goals), I will be happy then. I’m not happy now, because I haven’t achieved my goals.” This is never said out loud, but it’s what goals really mean. The problem is, when we achieve the goals, we don’t achieve happiness. We set new goals, strive for something new. And while many people will say that striving for something new is a good thing, that we should always be striving, unfortunately it means we’re never satisfied. We never find contentment. I think that’s unfortunate —we should learn how to be content now, with what we have. It’s what minimalism is all about, really. And if my philosophy is to be happy now, with enough, with the present, then how are goals consistent with this? It’s something I’ve tried to reconcile over the last few years, with some success. So if we are content now, and we abandon goals, does that mean we do nothing? Sit around or sleep all day? Not at all. I certainly don’t do that. We should do what makes us happy, follow our passions, do things that make us excited. For me and many people, that’s creating, building new things, expressing ourselves, making something useful or new or beautiful or inspiring. 78 So here’s what I do, instead of setting and achieving goals: » I do what excites me. Each day. I wake up, and work on things that I’m passionate about, create things that I love creating. » I don’t worry about where I’ll be (professionally) in a year or even six months, but where I am right now. » I don’t make plans, because they’re an illusion —you never know what will happen in a year or even six months. You can try to control what happens, but you’ll lose. Things always come up, sometimes good and sometimes bad, that will disrupt plans. Instead, I’ve learned to go with the flow, to not worry about things that disrupt plans but worry about what to do right now. This allows me to take advantage of opportunities that come up that I could never have planned for, to work on things I couldn’t have known about, to make decisions about what’s best right now, not what I planned a few months ago. » I don’t force things, but do what comes naturally. » And I focus on the present, on being happy now.

>“A good traveler has no fixed plans, and is not intent on arriving.” –Lao Tzu

>“Perfection is achieved, not when there is nothing more to add, but when there is nothing left to take away.” –Antoine de Saint-Exupe

>“An early-morning walk is a blessing for the whole day.” –Henry David Thoreau

>“Between stimulus and response there is a space. In that space is our power to choose our response. In our response lies our growth and our freedom.” –Victor Frankl
