# The Four Horsemen : The Conversation That Sparked an Atheist Revolution
Authors: Christopher Hitchens, Richard Dawkins, Sam Harris and Daniel Dennett  
[Amazon](https://amzn.to/3AZQJ1C)  
[Goodreads](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/40668391-the-four-horsemen)  

>The Hubris of Religion, the Humility of Science, and the Intellectual and Moral Courage of Atheism

>In September 2007, the annual conference of the Atheist Alliance International was held in Washington DC, Christopher Hitchens’s home city. Robin Elisabeth Cornwell, on behalf of the Richard Dawkins Foundation for Reason and Science, took advantage of the presence of all four ‘horsemen’ in the same place and organized a joint conversation, to be filmed by our resident cinematographers. The plan was that Ayaan Hirsi Ali would make a fifth, as lone horsewoman, thereby taking our progression on from Three Musketeers through Four Horsemen to Five Pillars of Wisdom. At the last minute, Ayaan unfortunately had to make an emergency dash to the Netherlands, where she had been a Member of Parliament. We missed her, and were pleased that she joined the three surviving horsemen in 2012, when the Global Atheist Convention in Melbourne staged a form of reprise.*1 Her presence unsurprisingly stimulated a partial switch to Islam as a topic. Now, back to the original meeting in 2007. In the evening of 30 September, the four of us sat round a table in Christopher and Carol’s airy, book-lined flat. Plied with cocktails, we had a two-hour conversation followed by a memorable dinner.

>DENNETT: It’s a sad fact that people won’t, in a sense, trust their own valuing of their numinous experiences. They think it isn’t really as good as it seems unless it’s from God, unless it’s some kind of a proof of religion. No, it’s just as wonderful as it seems. It’s just as important. It is the best moment in your life, and it’s the moment when you forget yourself and become better than you ever thought you could be, in some way, and you see, in all humbleness, the wonderfulness of nature. That’s it! And that’s wonderful. But it doesn’t add anything to say, ‘Golly, that has to have been given to me by Somebody even more wonderful.’

>DENNETT: I don’t think many of them ever let themselves contemplate the question which I think scientists ask themselves all the time: ‘What if I’m wrong?’ ‘What if I’m wrong?’ It’s just not part of their repertory.

>HARRIS: Well, also there’s this curious bootstrapping move, where they start with the premise that belief without evidence is especially noble. This is the doctrine of faith. This is the parable of Doubting Thomas. So they start with that and then add this notion, which has been hurled at me in various debates, that the fact that people can believe without evidence is itself a subtle form of evidence. Francis Collins, whom you mentioned, brings this up in his book.*10 The fact that we have this intuition of God is itself some subtle form of evidence. And it’s a kind of kindling phenomenon: once you say it’s good to start without evidence, the fact that you can proceed is a subtle form of evidence, and then the demand for any more evidence is itself a kind of corruption of the intellect, or a temptation, to be guarded against, and you get a kind of perpetual-motion machine of self-deception, once you can get this thing up and running.

>HARRIS: And every religious person makes the same criticism of other religions that we do. They reject the pseudo-miracles and the pseudo-claims and certainties of others. They see the confidence tricks in other people’s faith. And they see them rather readily. Every Christian knows that the Qur’an can’t be the perfect word of the creator of the universe and that anyone who thinks it is hasn’t read it closely enough. We make a very strong case when we point that out, and point out also that whatever people are experiencing in church or in prayer, no matter how positive, the fact that Buddhists and Hindus and Muslims and Christians are all experiencing it proves that it can’t be a matter of the divinity of Jesus or the unique sanctity of the Qur’an.

>HITCHENS: Yes. Because I’ll take things that you and Richard say on human natural sciences – not without wanting to check, but I’m often unable to – but knowing that you are the sort of gentlemen who would have checked. But if you say, ‘The bishop told me it so I believe it,’ you make a fool of yourself, it seems to me – and one is entitled to say so. Just as one is entitled, when dealing with an ordinary racist, to say that his opinions are revolting. He may know no better, but that’s not going to save him from my condemnation. And nor should it. And exactly, I think it’s condescending not to confront people, as it were, one by one or en masse. Public opinion is often wrong. Mob opinion is almost always wrong. Religious opinion is wrong by definition. We can’t avoid this—

>So, a question I wanted to ask was this. We should ask ourselves what our real objective is. Do we in fact wish to see a world without faith? I think I would have to say that I don’t. I don’t either expect to, or wish to, see that. HARRIS: What do you mean by faith? HITCHENS: Faith, as often as it’s cut down or superseded or discredited, replicates, it seems to me, extraordinarily fast, I think for Freudian reasons – principally to do with the fear of extinction or annihilation. HARRIS: You mean faith in supernatural paradigms? HITCHENS: Yes. Wish thinking. And then the other thing is: would I want this argument to come to an end, with all having conceded, ‘Hitchens really won that round. Now nobody in the world believes in God’? Now, apart from being unable to picture this, [Laughter] I’m not even completely certain that it’s what I want. I think it is rather to be considered the foundation of all arguments about epistemology, philosophy, biology, and so on – that it’s the thing you have to always be arguing against. The other explanation.

>DAWKINS: Yes, I want to answer this. Whether it’s astrology or religion or anything else, I want to live in a world where people think sceptically for themselves, look at evidence. Not because astrology’s harmful; I guess it probably isn’t harmful. But if you go through the world thinking that it’s OK to just believe things because you believe them without evidence, then you’re missing so much. And it’s such a wonderful experience to live in the world and understand why you’re living in the world, and understand what makes it work, understand about the real stars, understand about astronomy, that it’s an impoverishing thing to be reduced to the pettiness of astrology. And I think you can say the same of religion. The universe is a grand, beautiful, wonderful place, and it’s petty and parochial and cheapening to believe in jinns and supernatural creators and supernatural interferers. I think you could make an aesthetic case that you’d want to get rid of faith. HITCHENS: I could not possibly agree with you more.

>HARRIS: Certainly you can conceive of a circumstance where someone can seek knowledge the only conceivable application of which would be unethical, or the dissemination of which would put power in the wrong hands. But, actually, you brought up something which I think is crucial here. Because it’s not so much the spread of seditious truths to Islam or to the rest of the world that I think we’re guilty of in the eyes of our opponents. It’s that we don’t honour facts that aren’t easily quantified or easily discussed in science. The classic retort to all of us is, ‘Prove to me that you love your wife’ – as though this were a knock-down argument against atheism: you can’t prove it. Well, if you unpack that a little bit, you can prove it. You can demonstrate it. We know what we mean by ‘love’. But there is this domain of the sacred that is not easily captured by science, and scientific discourse has ceded it to religious discourse.

>HARRIS: Right. You raised this issue, though, of whether or not we would wish the churches empty on Sundays, and I think you were uncertain whether you would. And I think I would agree. I would want a different church. I would want a different ritual, motivated by different ideas. But I think there’s a place for the sacred in our lives, but under some construal that doesn’t presuppose any bullshit. I think there’s a usefulness to seeking profundity as a matter of our attention. HITCHENS: Sure. HARRIS: And our neglect of this area, as atheists, at times makes even our craziest opponents seem wiser than we are. And it takes someone like Sayyid Qutb,*18 who is as crazy as it gets – he was Osama bin Laden’s favourite philosopher. He came out to Greeley, Colorado, around 1950 and spent a year in America and noticed that his American hosts were spending all their time gossiping about movie stars and trimming their hedges and coveting each other’s automobiles, and he came to believe that America, or the West, was so trivial in its preoccupations and so materialistic that it had to be destroyed. Now, this shouldn’t be construed as my giving any credence to his worldview, but he had a point. There is something trivial and horrible about the day-to-day fascinations of most people, most of the time. There is a difference between using your attention wisely, in a meaningful way, and perpetual distraction. And traditionally only religion has tried to enunciate that difference. And I think that’s a lapse in our—

>HITCHENS: We don’t blow up Shia mosques, either. We don’t blow up the Bamiyan Buddhas. We don’t desecrate. We would, for the reasons given by Sophocles in Antigone, have a natural resistance to profanity and desecration. We leave it to the pious to destroy churches and burn synagogues or blow up each other’s mosques. And I think that’s a point that we ought to, we might, spend more time making. Because I do think it is feared of us – which was my point to begin with – that we wish for a world that’s somehow empty of this echo of music and poetry and the numinous, and so forth. That we would be happy in a Brave New World. And, since I don’t think it’s true of any of us— DAWKINS: No. No, it’s not. DENNETT: No, definitely. HITCHENS: I think it’s a point we might spend a bit more time making. That the howling wilderness of nothingness is much more likely to result from holy war or religious conflict or theocracy than it is from a proper secularism, which would therefore I think, have to not just allow or leave or tolerate or condescend to or patronize but actually, in a sense, welcome the persistence of something like faith. I feel I’ve put it better now than I did at the beginning. HARRIS: Well, what do you mean by ‘something like faith’? DENNETT: How like faith? HITCHENS: Something like the belief that there must be more than we can know. DENNETT: Well, that’s fine. HARRIS: Dan Dennett believes that. That’s not faith. DENNETT: Yes, sure! HARRIS: We know there’s more than we presently know and are likely to know. HITCHENS: That was my original point in saying that if we could find a way of enforcing the distinction between the numinous and the superstitious, we would be doing something culturally quite important. Richard and I debated at the Methodist Central Hall with Scruton and that rather weird team who kept on saying – Scruton, particularly – ‘Well, what about good old Gothic spires,’ and so forth. I said, ‘Look, I wrote a book about the Parthenon. I’m intensely interested in it. I think everyone should go there, everyone should study it, and so forth. But everyone should abstain from the cult of Pallas Athena. Everyone should realize that probably what that beautiful sculptural frieze depicts may involve some human sacrifices. Athenian imperialism wasn’t all that pretty, even in the Age of Pericles.’ The great cultural project, in other words, may very well be to rescue what we have of the art and aesthetic of religion while discarding the supernatural. DENNETT: And I think acknowledging the evil that was part of its creation in the first place. That is, we can’t condone the beliefs and practices of the Aztecs, but we can stand in awe of, and want to preserve, their architecture and many other features of their culture. But not their practices [laughs] and not their beliefs. DAWKINS: I was once a guest on a British radio programme called Desert Island Discs, where you have to choose the eight records which you’d take to a desert island and talk about them. And one of the ones I chose was Bach’s Mache dich, mein Herze, rein. Wonderful, wonderful sacred music. DENNETT: Beautiful. DAWKINS: And the woman questioning me couldn’t understand why I would wish to have this piece of music. Beautiful music, and its beauty is indeed enhanced by knowing what it means. But you don’t actually have to believe it; it’s like reading fiction. DENNETT: Exactly. DAWKINS: You can lose yourself in fiction, and be totally moved to tears by it, but nobody would ever say you’ve got to believe that this person existed or that the sadness that you feel really reflected something that actually happened. HITCHENS: Yes. Like the Irish bishop who said that he’d read Gulliver’s Travels and for his part he didn’t believe a word of it.*20 [Laughter] It’s the best of locus classicus, I think – of all of that. Clearly, we’re not cultural vandals, but maybe we should think about why so many people suspect that that’s what we are. If I were to accept one criticism that these people make, or one suspicion that I suspect they harbour, or fear that they may have, I think that that might be the one: that it would be all chromium and steel and—

>HITCHENS: We’re about to have the Christmas wars again, of course; this being the last day of September. You can feel it all coming on. But whenever it comes up, when I go on any of these shows to discuss it, I say it was Oliver Cromwell who cut down the Christmas trees and forbade… It was the Puritan Protestants, the ancestors of the American fundamentalists, who said Christmas would be blasphemy. DAWKINS: Yes. It’s the Bamiyan Buddhas again. HITCHENS: Do you at least respect your own traditions? Because I do. I think Cromwell was a great man in many other ways as well. Christmas is actually a pagan festival. HARRIS: We were all outed with our Christmas trees last year. DENNETT: Yes. DAWKINS: I have not the slightest problem with Christmas trees. DENNETT: We had our Christmas card, with our pictures of— HITCHENS: It’s a good old Norse booze-up. And why the hell not? DENNETT: Well, but it’s not just that. HITCHENS: I like solstices as much as the next person. DENNETT: We have an annual Christmas carol party, where we sing the music. And all the music with all the words, and not the secular Christmas stuff. DAWKINS: And why not? DENNETT: And it’s just glorious stuff. That part of the Christian story is fantastic – it’s just a beautiful tale! And you can love every inch of it without believing it. DAWKINS: I once, at lunch, was next to the lady who was our opponent at that debate in London. HITCHENS: Rabbi Neuberger. DAWKINS: Rabbi Neuberger. And she asked me whether I said grace in New College when I happened to be senior fellow. And I said, ‘Of course I say grace. It’s a matter of simple courtesy.’ And she was furious that I should somehow be so hypocritical as to say grace. And I could only say, ‘Well, look, it may mean something to you, but it means absolutely nothing to me. This is a Latin formula which has some history, and I appreciate history.’ Freddie Ayer,*23 the philosopher, also used to say grace, and what he said was, ‘I won’t utter falsehoods but I have no objection to uttering meaningless statements.’ [Laughter] HITCHENS: That’s very good. The Wykeham Professor. DAWKINS: The Wykeham Professor, yes. HITCHENS: Did we answer your question on Islam? HARRIS: I don’t know. Well, I’ll ask a related question. Do you feel there’s any burden we have, as critics of religion, to be evenhanded in our criticism of religion, or is it fair to notice that there’s a spectrum of religious ideas and commitments and Islam is on one end of it and the Amish and the Jains and others are on another end, and there are real differences here that we have to take seriously. DENNETT: Well, of course we have to take them seriously, but we don’t have to do the network-balancing trick all the time. There are plenty of people taking care of pointing out the good stuff, and the benign stuff. And we can acknowledge that and then concentrate on the problems. That’s what critics do. Again, if we were writing books about the pharmaceutical industry, would we have to spend equal time on all the good they do? Or could we specialize in the problems? I think it’s very clear. DAWKINS: I think Sam’s asking more about— HARRIS: Well, we could criticize Merck if they were especially egregious compared to some other company. If we were focusing on the pharmaceutical industry, not all pharmaceutical businesses would be culpable to the same degree. DENNETT: Yes, right, well, so then the question is what? Is there something wrong with just— DAWKINS: Sam’s asking about whether we should be evenhanded in criticizing the different religions, and you’re talking about evenhandedness regarding good versus bad. HITCHENS: Whether all religions are equally bad. DAWKINS: Yes, whether Islam is worse than Christianity. HARRIS: It seems to me that we fail to enlist the friends we have on this subject when we balance this. It’s a media tactic, and it’s almost an ontological commitment of atheism, to say that all faith claims are in some sense equivalent. The media says the Muslims have their extremists and we have our extremists. There are jihadists in the Middle East and we have people killing abortion doctors. And that’s just not an honest equation. The mayhem that’s going on under the aegis of Islam just cannot be compared to the fact that we have two people a decade who kill abortionists. And this is one of the problems I have with the practice of atheism: it hobbles us when we have to seem to spread the light of criticism equally in all directions at all moments, whereas we could, on some questions, have a majority of religious people agree with us. A majority of people in the United States clearly agree that the doctrine of martyrdom in Islam is appalling and not at all benign, and liable to get a lot of people killed, and that it is worthy of criticism. Likewise the doctrine that souls live in Petri dishes: even most Christians, 70 per cent of Americans, don’t want to believe that, in light of the promise of embryonic stem-cell research. So it seems to me that once we focus on particulars, we have a real strength in numbers, and yet when we stand on the ramparts of atheism and say it’s all bogus, we lose 90 per cent of our neighbours. DAWKINS: Well, I’m sure that’s right. On the other hand, my concern is actually not so much with the evils of religion as with whether it’s true. And I really do care passionately about the fact of the matter: is there, as a matter of fact, a supernatural creator of this universe? And I really care about that bogus belief. And so, although I also care about the evils of religion, I am prepared to be evenhanded, because they all make this claim, it seems to me, equally. HITCHENS: I would never give up the claim that all religions are equally false. And for that reason: because they’re false in preferring faith to reason. And latently at least, they’re equally dangerous. DAWKINS: Equally false, but surely not quite equally dangerous. Because— HITCHENS: No. Latently, I think so. DAWKINS: Latently, maybe. Yes. HITCHENS: Because of the surrender of the mind. The eagerness to discard the only thing we’ve got that makes us higher primates: the faculty of reason. That’s always deadly. DENNETT: I’m not sure that— DAWKINS: It’s potentially dangerous. HITCHENS: The Amish can’t hurt me, but they can sure hurt the people who live in their community if they have a little totalitarian system. HARRIS: But not quite in the same way. HITCHENS: The Dalai Lama claims to be a god king, a hereditary monarch, an inherited god, in essence. It’s a most repulsive possible idea. And he runs a crummy little dictatorship in Dharamsala. And praises the nuclear tests. It’s limited only by his own limited scope – the same evil is present. HARRIS: But if you added jihad to that, you’d be more concerned.

>HITCHENS: Well, look, every time I’ve ever debated with Islamists they’ve all said, ‘You’ve just offended a billion Muslims,’ as if they spoke for them. As if, and there’s a definite threat to this, a menace, a military tone to what they say. In other words, if they’d said, ‘You’ve just offended me as a Muslim,’ that doesn’t sound quite the same, does it? If they were the only one who believed in the prophet Mohammed. No, no, it’s a billion. And, by the way, what’s implied in that is, ‘Watch out!’ I don’t care. If there was only one person who believed that the prophet Mohammed had been given dictation by the Archangel Gabriel, I’d still say what I was saying. HARRIS: Right, but you wouldn’t lie awake at night. HITCHENS: And it would be just as dangerous that they believed that. Yes, it would. Because it could spread. The belief could become more general. HARRIS: But in the case of Islam, it has spread, and it’s spreading, and so its danger is not only potential but actual. DAWKINS: Yes. I can see no contradiction. You’re talking about different things. HITCHENS: Yes, but over space and time, all that, I think, tremendously evens out. I mean, I didn’t expect, and I’m sure neither did you, that in the sixties there would be such a threat from Jewish fundamentalism. Relatively small numbers, but in a very important place, a strategic place, in deciding to try and bring on the Messiah by stealing other people’s land and trying to bring on the end. It’s numerically extremely small, but the consequences that it’s had have been absolutely calamitous. We didn’t use to think actually that Judaism was a threat in that way at all, until the Zionist movement annexed the Messianic, or fused with it – because the Messianists didn’t use to be Zionists, as you know. So you never know what’s coming next. HARRIS: Well, that I certainly agree with. HITCHENS: And I agree that I’m not likely to have my throat cut at the supermarket by a Quaker. But the Quakers do say, ‘We preach non-resistance to evil.’ That’s as wicked as a position as you could possibly have. HARRIS: Given the right context, yes. HITCHENS: What could be more revolting than that? Saying you see evil and violence and cruelty and you don’t fight it. DENNETT: Yes, they’re free riders. HITCHENS: Yes. Read Franklin*24 on what the Quakers were like at the crucial moment, in Philadelphia, when there had to be a battle over freedom, and see why people despised them. I would have then said that Quakerism was actually quite a serious danger to the United States. So, it’s a matter of space and time. But no, they’re all equally rotten, false, dishonest, corrupt, humourless and dangerous, in the last analysis.

>HITCHENS: Well, that’s why I think the moment where everything went wrong is the moment when the Jewish Hellenists were defeated by the Jewish Messianists – the celebration now benignly known as Hanukkah. That’s where the human race took its worst turn. A few people re-established the animal sacrifices, the circumcision and the cult of Yahweh over Hellenism and philosophy. And Christianity’s a plagiarism of that. Christianity would never have happened if that hadn’t happened and nor would Islam. I have no doubt there would have been other crazed cults and so forth, but there might have been a chance to not destroy Hellenistic civilization. HARRIS: You’d still have the Dalai Lama to worry about. HITCHENS: Well, it’s not a matter of numbers, it’s a matter of, if I may say so, memes and infections. I would have certainly said in the 1930s that the Catholic Church was the most deadly organization, because of its alliance with fascism, which was explicit and open and sordid. Much the most dangerous church. But I would not now say that the Pope is the most dangerous of the religious authorities. No question that Islam is the most dangerous religion, and probably because it doesn’t have a papacy that can tell it to stop something, make an edict saying— HARRIS: Yes. No top-down control. HITCHENS: By all means, yes. But I would still have to say that Judaism is the root of the problem. HARRIS: Although it’s only the root of the problem in light of the Muslim fixation on that land. If the Muslims didn’t care about Palestine, we could have the settlers trying to usher in the Messiah all they want. There would have been no issue. It’s only the conflict of claims on that real estate. Both sides are at fault, but the only reason why 200,000 settlers could potentially precipitate a global conflict is because there are a billion people who really care whether those settlers tear down the Al-Aqsa mosque and— HITCHENS: Which it’s their dream to do. Because they have the belief that one part of the globe is holier than another – than which no belief could be more insane or irrational or indecent. And so just a few of them, holding that view and having the power to make it real, is enough to risk a civilizational conflict, which civilization could lose. I think we’ll be very lucky if we get through this conflict without a nuclear exchange.

>HARRIS: That leads us to a very good topic. What are our most grandiose hopes and fears here? What do you think could be accomplished in the lifetime of our children? What do you think the stakes actually are? DENNETT: And how would you get there? HARRIS: And is there something we could engineer, apart from mere criticism? Are there practical steps? With a billion dollars, what could we do to effect some significant change of ideas? HITCHENS: I feel myself on the losing side politically and on the winning side intellectually. DENNETT: You don’t see anything to do? HITCHENS: In the current zeitgeist, I don’t think we would be accused of undue conceit if we said of ourselves, or didn’t mind it being said of us, that we’ve been opening and carrying forward and largely winning an argument that’s been neglected for too long. And that’s certainly true in the United States and Britain at this moment, it seems to me. But in global terms I think we’re absolutely in a tiny, dwindling minority that’s going to be defeated by the forces of theocracy. HARRIS: So you’re betting against us? HITCHENS: I think they’re going to end up by destroying civilization. I’ve long thought so. But not without a struggle. DENNETT: Well, of course you may be right, because it can be a single catastrophe. HITCHENS: That’s my big disagreement with Professor Dawkins: I think it’s us, plus the 82nd Airborne and the 101st,*25 who are the real fighters for secularism at the moment, the ones who are really fighting the main enemy. And I think probably, among secularists, that must be considered the most eccentric position you could possibly hold. That’s tooth-fairy belief among those people. I believe it to be an absolute fact. It’s only because of the willingness of the United States to combat and confront theocracy that we have a chance of beating it. Our arguments are absolutely of no relevance. HARRIS: You may have many more takers, although not on the territory of Iraq. I mean, it may be that we need the 82nd Airborne to fight a different war in a different place, for the stated purpose. HITCHENS: Voilà! By all means, there are reservations to be expressed by me, which I’ll happily give you. But in principle, I think that’s a very important recognition. DAWKINS: Unfortunately we’re running out of time. HITCHENS: And possibly tape. [Laughter] DAWKINS: I think we’ve had a wonderful discussion. DENNETT: Yes, great. DAWKINS: Thank you very much. DENNETT: We’ve got a lot to think about.