# The Man's Guide to Women
Authors: John and Julie Gottman  
[Amazon](https://amzn.to/3jeVn3D)  
[Goodreads](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/25664439-the-man-s-guide-to-women)  

>Chapter 1: What Do Women Really Want?

>The number one thing women look for is simply this: trustworthiness. That’s right, trustworthiness. Now before you go patting yourself on the back and putting this book down because you know that she knows that you are trustworthy, think again. Trustworthiness isn’t just about whether or not you are a player or, if you’re in a long-term relationship, whether or not you’ve ever been unfaithful. Although those things are fundamental and important to trustworthiness, they are not enough. What trustworthiness looks like in dating and mating is this: You are who you say you are and you do what you say you are going to do. It’s about reliability, accountability, and showing up just as you are (but with good hygiene). Why is trustworthiness so important? Why is this the quality that makes a woman’s heart soar? Think about it. Throughout history, a woman’s safety and well-being, as well as that of her children, have been dependent on her partner’s trustworthiness. This is not just some antiquated issue from yesteryear, either. Fathers turn out to be the most critical factor in the health and success of children across a wide range of influences. When fathers are not involved with their kids, there’s a five times greater likelihood that the kids will live in poverty, a three times greater likelihood that they’ll fail in school, and a two times greater likelihood that they will have emotional and behavioral problems, use drugs, get involved in crime, or commit suicide.1 Men make a difference. And men matter immensely to women and to their children, so there’s a reason women are looking for men who are trustworthy.

>In our interviews in the Love Lab, we asked men and women whether or not they felt they could talk to their partners (especially when they felt sad, angry, or in need of affection), and we discovered a fundamental fact: The fights of many couples result from men dismissing women’s emotions instead of attuning to them. You dismiss a woman’s emotions every time you try to fix them, distract her from them, minimize them, mock them, or ignore them altogether. Learn the relatively simple and fundamental skill of attunement and your relationship with women will change profoundly. (Attunement will also serve you well at work, in parenting, and in all of your relationships.)

>Trait women want most: trustworthiness. Trust is built through: emotional connection. Emotional connection is created through: attunement. Therefore, emotional attunement = trustworthiness. So where can you buy a can of attunement? You can’t. But you can learn it. It’s not complex. It’s not rocket science. And it has a handy acronym, so the next time you’re with a woman you can think: Just A-TT-U-N-E. ATTEND. Give your undivided attention when it’s needed. This means that if a woman wants to talk to you, turn off the game, put away your cell phone, and show by your actions that you care about her and about what she is saying. Even if it is the minutiae of her day or something that seems unimportant to you, it is important to her and is a request for connection. If you are on a date, direct your attention to the woman you are with. No scanning the room, no checking out other women, no texting your buddies during dinner. Attention equals affection. Attention ultimately is how you express love. TURN TOWARD. This is not a metaphor or a new age expression. Physically. Turn. Toward. Your. Partner. Women equate intimacy with conversation that is face-to-face and eyeball-to-eyeball. Biological anthropologist Helen Fisher, PhD, of Rutgers University, says, “Men regard intimacy as playing or working side by side. Their approach to intimacy probably harks back to prehistory: Picture ancestral males gathering behind a bush, quietly staring across the grass in hopes of felling a passing buffalo. They faced their enemies but sat next to their friends.”2 Bottom line: Unless you and your woman are about to take down a buffalo, turn toward her while you talk. UNDERSTAND. No matter what she is saying, the goal is understanding. And how you get to understanding is by asking questions. If the woman in your life is complaining about her best friend, don’t offer a solution, don’t try to distract her, don’t think of how you can “fix” the problem, don’t make jokes, and don’t minimize the problem. Ask questions about what she is feeling and what it all means to her. This part of attuning is not about saying “I understand”; it’s about showing genuine interest and attempting to understand why this is important to her. Whether she is complaining about her mother, frustrated with her boss, or pissed off at you—let understanding be your goal. NONDEFENSIVELY LISTEN. If you are paying attention, turning toward her, and seeking understanding, you are well on your way down the path of nondefensive listening. This is especially important if what a woman is talking about or is upset about is you. Don’t react. No one likes to be criticized or feel like they are under attack. But the tricky thing is, if you counterattack, make excuses, justify, or argue, you are only going to be criticized more. Don’t interrupt and don’t forget that any feeling is fact to the person feeling it. Whether or not you agree with her reactions or how she sees reality, her feelings are real to her in that moment. You only need to listen to her express them. You were given two ears and only one mouth for a reason—so you will listen twice as much as you speak. Many a wise man has followed these words. It’s hard to underscore how important this finding was in our lab. The men who were able to “downregulate” their anger (in other words, calm themselves down and not overreact), were the men with great relationships.

>We won’t go deep into the brain science explaining why this works, but let’s just say that the emotional part of the brain calms down when it feels connected to another person and not alone. Show empathy. Show compassion. It’s not about being wrong or being right.

>The Bottom Line Men are always asking the question, “What are women trying to accomplish when they become emotional?” This is a hopelessly male question. Women are baffled by this question. When men say a woman is being “emotional,” they are not talking about joy, fun, play, humor, interest, excitement, adventure, lust, or passion. They are not talking about the positive emotions. Men have no problem with a woman expressing those emotions. Men have a problem with the so-called “negative” emotions, like sadness, anger, fear, disappointment, jealousy, loneliness, shame, and insecurity. These are emotions that many men would just rather not have at all, much less constantly talk about or dwell on. The majority of men believe that talking about these feelings will only make matters worse. This is not true. But most women don’t feel that way about these emotions. Let’s be clear. Let’s get to the ultimate bottom line: For a woman, there are no negative emotions. For a woman, there is no “point” to being emotional. Emotions just are. For women, they’re as natural as breathing.

>Ultimately, any relationship between two people will have “issues.” No two people are going to agree on everything. The goal is not to turn the other person into you. The goal is to understand the unique, amazing, annoying, complex, frustrating, fascinating person you are in a relationship with. Wouldn’t it be boring if you were dating a clone of yourself, or worse, married to your clone? Since you can’t clone yourself what can you do? You can try to understand her. When you give up trying to change her into someone more like you, you can attune to who she really is. That’s when the real magic happens.

>WHAT WOMEN WANT MOST: TRUSTWORTHINESS. number one thing women want from you is trustworthiness. You demonstrate trustworthiness by being who you say you are and doing what you say you are going to do. You show up and you show up as yourself. THE SECRET OF TRUSTWORTHINESS: ATTUNEMENT. Women need to feel emotionally connected and emotionally safe. This happens through attunement. When a woman wants to connect with you, especially when she’s upset about something, you A-TT-U-N-E: You Attend to her, you physically Turn Toward her, you seek to Understand her by asking questions, you Nondefensively Listen, and you Empathize by accepting and affirming her emotions. DON’T BEAT YOUR CHEST. Women also need to feel physically safe with you. A Hero never uses his size or his voice to intimidate a woman or make a point. A lack of physical safety is a deal breaker with women. TRUSTWORTHINESS = LESS FIGHTING AND MORE SEX. When a woman feels emotionally connected to you and when you demonstrate your trustworthiness, the result is less fighting and more sex. Win-Win-WIN. YOU MIGHT BE A ZERO IF. . . You dismiss her emotions or immediately try to fix them. You use your voice, size, or strength to intimidate. You check your e-mail while she’s trying to talk to you or in other ways that don’t give her your attention when she needs it or asks for it. You don’t show up when you say you will. You check out other women when you are with her. You keep secrets. You lie. You cheat. You lie about cheating.

>Chapter 9: Becoming Her Best Ever

>Generally, we can conclude that the bottom line is that men have fewer prerequisites for sex than women do. Honestly, how many men have a list of requirements before they are willing to have sex? Anyone? The difference between men and women is often expressed this way: Women need to feel emotionally connected to have sex, and men need to have sex to feel emotionally connected. But we think the statement that men have fewer prerequisites than women fits the data better. It partly explains why gay men have the most sex of any type of couple—two people with fewer prerequisites. It also partly explains why lesbians have the least sex of any type of couple: Two people with the most prerequisites.

>Chapter 10: Learn to Fight Like a Girl

>You can’t bully her out of being sad or mad, and you can’t reason her out of being sad or mad. You can’t solve the problem of her being sad or mad by applying your keen logic, reasoning, or negotiating skills. This may work at the office. It may work in sports. It may work with the men you play poker with. But it will not work with the woman in your life, and it will save you both a lot of headache and heartache if you accept this inevitable truth right up front.

>Where the differences lie, according to research, is in how men and women manage their anger. Bottom line, men handle their anger differently. Sandra Thomas from the University of Tennessee led the Women’s Anger Study, the first “large-scale, comprehensive, empirical study of the everyday anger of ordinary women.” Her research found that the causes of women’s anger could be rooted in one or more of three categories: powerlessness, injustice, and the irresponsibility of other people.2 So if you are not listening to your woman (or you refuse to relinquish control of the remote), she is going to get angry because she will feel powerless. If you don’t treat her as an equal in the decision making process or if you betray her trust, she is going to feel injustice and she is going to get angry. If you don’t do your fair share of work around the house or don’t show up when you say you are going to (irresponsibility of others), she is going to be angry with you.

>We’re going to let you in on two secrets we discovered in the Love Lab. First, men get more emotionally flooded and overwhelmed than women do in a conflict situation. And second, once flooded, only men who are able to reduce their heart rates are able to decrease the amount of criticism, defensiveness, contempt, and stonewalling they contribute to the conflict.

>So what does this look like on any given day? Imagine you and the woman of your dreams are both home after a long day of work. She wants to talk. You want to watch television. You turn on the news or a game, and she wants to tell you about a coworker who unfairly took credit for her big idea on a project. At this point, she’s not mad at you, she’s mad at this coworker. Perhaps she’s feeling powerless to change the situation at work or mad at the injustice of someone else stealing her idea—two of the three areas that research has shown make most women angry. You aren’t listening. You care, but you’re tired, thinking of your own day at work, or perhaps you’re just hoping for a little rest and relaxation before tomorrow, when you have to slay another dragon. Then you hear the words, “You’re not listening to me.” Now most men hear this as criticism, rather than what it really is—a need for connection and a bid for attention from your woman. After being ignored, this sentence could rapidly turn into, “You never listen to me,” which is criticism. If you are unwittingly ushering in the Four Horsemen, your response may be to just ignore this criticism and hope it goes away (another horseman, stonewalling). Or, while never taking your eyes off the television, you could say, “I am listening!” (defensiveness). Or your response could be, “I don’t listen because every day it’s the same thing, blah, blah, blah. Why don’t you just quit that job if everyone treats you so horribly?” (contempt). Or, worst of all, “You’re always so negative” (criticism), or “I don’t listen because you are never logical and always complaining about something” (also contempt). Does any of this sound familiar? These are all ways of escalating conflict. If your goal is to have less conflict with the woman in your life, avoid responding to her with stonewalling, defensiveness, criticism, or contempt. It’s self-defeating and a recipe for disaster. Yet this is what men do naturally when they get emotionally flooded. In this example, the woman wants understanding; she’s looking for someone to listen, empathize, and attune. Her discussion of her day didn’t start out as a conflict with you. But things can take a rapid turn in this direction when you fail to offer the connection and understanding a woman wants when she is upset about anything. When you hear anything that sounds like criticism, it can feel like a personal assault, so your primal defense system kicks into gear and you get emotionally flooded. Your heart rate goes up, you are hypervigilant to danger, and you’re ready to defend against attack. It’s called diffuse physiological arousal (DPA), and in our study of more than 3,000 couples, we found that it is impossible to communicate when in this physiologically aroused state. You know you are flooded if your heart rate is over 100 beats per minute (or 80, if you are in great physical shape). That’s the point at which you start secreting adrenaline and launch into DPA. In DPA, you lose access to your sense of humor, cannot listen very well (hearing and peripheral vision are compromised), and tend to repeat yourself (which we call “the summarizing yourself syndrome”). None of these are very good portents for great attunement. Flooding is the real enemy of constructive dialogue and productive conflict. While flooding has been described before, we now understand it much better because of recent research from the Love Lab. Flooding has three major components: (1) the shock of attack and the need to defend, (2) emotional shutdown, and (3) the inability to self-soothe. We also now know that flooding is the key variable in low-level domestic violence (fights that get out of control and turn into physical aggression).

>So there you are, trying to watch the sports channel at the end of the day, and she says, “You never listen to me.” If you were a cartoon, your face would get red and steam would start shooting out of your ears. This is what flooding feels like. Adrenaline races through your bloodstream and your instincts tell you to fight or take flight (grab your hat and coat and leave). Neither strategy works if you’re hoping to have a successful relationship with a woman. So what can you do when you get emotionally flooded? (And even the most enlightened man gets flooded when he feels criticized or attacked.) The Heroes have three simple strategies that have been scientifically proven to reduce their heart rate. The first is to breathe and the second is to count to 10. Breathing and counting to 10 are ways of downregulating or self-soothing. When you take a deep breath you stimulate the vagus nerve, which in turn reduces your heart rate and lowers your blood pressure. If you still feel no noticeable decrease in your desire to attack your woman verbally (or even physically), then the third strategy is to take a break. There is a difference, however, between taking a break and taking flight. You can’t just abandon your woman in the middle of a heated conversation. You have to say something to the effect of, “You know what, I’m having a hard time listening to you right now, and I will come back in 30 minutes so we can continue to talk.” If you don’t do this, she is going to be hurt by your flight and will worry that you’re abandoning her and will never return. Remember, when you are in fight-or-flight mode, when you are physiologically aroused, you are an evolutionarily honed, fine-tuned aggression or flight machine. Anthropologists tell us that men, and even males among our early hominid ancestors, evolved specifically to stay vigilant about danger. Mostly it was males who protected the clan from predators and enemies. They had to stay vigilant and watchful for signals of danger, and then react quickly. That all required sustained physiological arousal. Staying vigilant means staying on edge and physiologically activated. Today’s men are descendants of the males who were good at that stuff. The ones who weren’t good at this didn’t make it. So even though men have evolved, they still maintain vigilance and physiological arousal for long periods once they perceive danger. That is all fine and good when there is real danger. But it isn’t too functional when you get your vigilance system aroused by conflict with your partner. Why isn’t it functional? Physiological arousal creates a sort of tunnel vision in which all nonvital bodily functions (like digesting food, supplying blood to your kidneys and genitals, and managing calm and considered thinking) are shut down temporarily so that you can react to the immediate danger. You sacrifice your peripheral vision and hearing. You move carbohydrates stored in your liver as glycogen into your bloodstream as glucose so you can have energy to defend yourself, your family, and your tribe. This adaptive response is great for fighting or fleeing. It’s not very good for listening to your partner. It’s not very good for maintaining a sense of humor. It’s not very good for creative problem solving. It’s not very good for practicing empathy. It’s not very good for being able to see issues from another perspective. The adaptive response to danger works against you when it is activated during a relationship conflict. So if you didn’t feel any empathy for her during a recent argument, you were probably in DPA. You were flooded. Women, on the other hand, are

>The third strategy of taking a break only works if it’s a break where you are not thinking about getting even or thinking about being an innocent victim of the alleged spear throwing. If you take a break but spend it thinking about either of these things, you are going to stay physically aroused and emotionally flooded. You need to totally distract yourself. The break needs to be at least 20 minutes long because it takes that long to diffuse the flooding hormones. If after 20 minutes you are still not calm, then come back to your partner and tell her you need a little more time before responding. In our research, we showed that after conflict a man’s heart rate did not lower when he thought about his wife’s negative qualities. Surprisingly, it also didn’t lower when he spent 20 minutes thinking about his wife’s positive qualities. Guess what lowered the heart rate of our participants: reading a magazine. What you need when you’re emotionally flooded is a distraction. You need to think about anything but the person you are in conflict with and the conversation that caused the emotional flooding. It’s about self-soothing and down-regulating your nervous system. Think about your golf game. Think about baseball. Think about England. Think about anything that has nothing to do with your conflict, and you will soon be able to think clearly. Doing something physical can also help. You can take a walk, read a book, listen to music, go for a run, do some yoga, or meditate.

>Chapter 11: Why Does It Take So Long To Buy a Pair of Shoes?

>Germany seems to have things figured out with the creation of Mannergartens in their malls. These spaces are designed exclusively as places where men can wait while women shop. For a few euros, a man gets two beers, men’s magazines, a television tuned to the sports channel, and even a model railway car. Apparently the French have followed suit, although they call their men zones garderies, which in English means nursery school. You might be offended, but keep in mind that they also serve beer.

>Peter Bentler, PhD, and Michael Newcomb, PhD, found that what best predicted whether marriages would last was, believe it or not, a woman’s clothes-consciousness.4 The grim reality is that if she looks good, she will not only attract a partner, but also keep him. For millennia, the evaluation of women has been based on their attractiveness to men, mostly on how sexy they look. When women shop, it’s typically for clothes, cosmetics, and jewelry, and inevitably this is about appearance. Women compete to look great the same way men compete in their jobs or in sports. Women feel they must prove themselves because they subconsciously believe they won’t earn a man’s love and commitment if they are not deemed attractive. Then, without consciously realizing it, they worry that they won’t have a chance to procreate and continue their genetic line. So for women, shopping is a matter of personal and genetic survival. If she takes longer to select her clothes, that’s because for her it really is a matter of life and death.

>Chapter 12: Best Friends Forever

>What amazed the world about Berkman and Syme’s results was that what determined whether people would eventually wind up alive or dead at an early age was not cholesterol, or exercise, or diet, but the quality of their most personal relationships in life. Interestingly, what determined whether men would die younger was whether or not they were married, whereas for women it was their friendships with other women that determined their longevity. Subsequent research by Lois Verbrugge, PhD, a researcher from the University of Michigan, has shown that the quality of a marriage also helped determine both women’s and men’s longevity. So if you want to live a long time, stay with your partner and maintain happiness in your relationship. If you want your partner to live a long time, encourage her to nurture her female friendships.

>There is an evolutionary basis for why women form such close friendships. Much of their survival in the hunter–gatherer era was based on the ability to “affiliate” within the tribe. A woman’s relationship with other females determined her safety and well-being and also her children’s social status. The more female relationships she had and maintained, the higher the status of her children. Affiliation with others in the tribe reduced a woman’s vulnerability and that of her offspring. It was the woman’s responsibility to build a large social network—it meant more resources were shared. If you were the hunter and you came home without any meat, the larger the social network built by your mate, the more likely it was that your family would eat. The affiliations of females are important in organizing many societies. In fact, among rhesus macaque monkeys, a male’s social status and power are determined by who his mother is. Females, not males, determine the social hierarchy of the group. Evolutionary biology tells us that females should have more developed attachment and affiliation systems than males. You see this today when women organize meals to bring to a new mother or to someone in mourning. Women had the ability to mobilize social support in prehistoric times, and they have that ability (far more so than men do) today.

>Chapter 13: Is She the One?

>The type of commitment that comes with being married adds an average of 8 years to a man’s life. The bottom line then, for men, is that a major key to longevity and good health is a quality committed relationship with a woman,

>In the Norwegian study, in addition to men being less overweight and smoking less, having an educated wife was also more likely to result in the men having lower blood pressure and lower cholesterol. Sociologist Linda Waite claims in her book, The Case for Marriage, that one of the real reasons the benefits of marriage are so great for men is because single men take such terrible care of themselves.3 She’s right. When men are single, they tend to drift into bad health, and they’re also more likely to become socially isolated. Men drink more when they’re single. They use drugs more frequently. It’s not the same for single women—they tend to lead pretty healthy lives without men.

>Commitment As a Journey You can define commitment as wanting a relationship to last and doing what it takes to make the relationship last. When you commit, you say “This is the woman for me, this is my journey, and this is my path.” When you find “the one,” you cherish her and you express gratitude for what she adds to your life. You don’t compare your relationship with her to what you might be missing out on by being committed. It’s more than just trust and loyalty, it’s an epic journey—the Hero’s journey. You make the decision to take this journey, and it can be risky. You are saying that this relationship, this one woman, is where you are going to get your needs met. You are vowing to be in this relationship no matter what and to weather any storm together. You are agreeing to build a life with this woman, love her for exactly who she is, and support her in becoming who she wants to be. This is the Hero’s journey when he makes a commitment. The Zero’s journey is to always say, “Maybe there’s something better out there. Why should I commit?” If you’ve found the one, cherish her, attune to her, make love to her, commit to her, and be there for her. You’ll be absolutely amazed at how wonderful life can be. For us, this knowledge is personal. We’ve been on our journeys for decades, and life has surpassed our wildest dreams.

>Chapter 14: Mother Nature

>There is still that sense in many guys of being overwhelmed by all the demands of family life. At times, everyone in a relationship wants to bail and hit that reset button. This feeling is related to “running on empty.” Many men that John and Julie see in therapy are running on empty. When children become part of the equation, men complain that their lives don’t have enough fun, playfulness, good sex, or adventure. They complain that women are just too involved with the minutiae of daily living and, especially when children arrive, that their lives become an endless to-do list. There’s no fun, no romance, no passion, no adventure. This doesn’t have to be the case, and men are the critical factor when it comes to making a family life and a romantic life that continues to be fun, adventurous, and a true partnership. Yes, there are more demands on your time when a child or children enter the picture, but you can fight it or you can roll up your sleeves and become a partner in this wild and fabulous adventure called family life. As John and Doug and many other men who have had the joy and privilege of being caregivers for children believe, there is actually nothing in life more rewarding. If you win a Nobel Prize or sell a start-up for a billion dollars, it will pale in comparison to the love and satisfaction that comes from helping your children grow up. The truth is, mother love is a force of nature—and so is father love. As we explained earlier, men are the crucial variable in the success or failure of relationships. They are also a crucial variable in the success of a family.

>Chapter 15: Staying Together

>In some ways, this book can be boiled down to a very simple mathematical equation: Hero > Zero WHY? Hero = turns toward his Partner Zero = turns away from his Partner IT’S REALLY QUITE SIMPLE.