# Prosper!: How to Prepare for the Future and Create a World Worth Inheriting
Author: Chris Martenson  
[Amazon](https://amzn.to/3i8kq83)  
[Goodreads](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/27135293-prosper)  

>Financial capital is the one with which most people are most intuitively familiar. It’s our money, our stock and bond portfolios, the income we receive from our jobs, and our expenses and debts. Social capital involves our private and public relationships. These are the relationships that nourish and guide us, the less intimate relationships we have with people with whom we exchange favors, and the connections that we can draw upon to meet our needs and offer our goods and services. Living capital is the land, the trees, the water, the soil, and the animals around us. It’s our bodies as well– our health, fitness level, and physical abilities. Material capital refers to tangible possessions such as homes, bridges, building materials, tools, stored food, computers, solar arrays, and cars. Knowledge capital includes the things that we know and our expertise in applying that knowledge. Emotional and spiritual capital is measured by our personal capacity to roll with the punches, to weather inner storms and outer dramas while remaining calm and centered. Cultural capital is defined by the stories, songs, and habits of the local population we live among. Some communities react well to adversity and some do not. The difference is a measure of the cultural capital of each. And finally we have time as a form of capital, which refers to the precious, ever-depleting commodity that we need to allocate wisely if we wish to inhabit a future filled with prosperity and abundance.

>If you indeed put these actions into practice, you will be substantially better positioned to persevere through adversity—whether that be a natural disaster, the sudden loss of income or a loved one, a meltdown of the financial system, or a slow downwards grind in living standards as energy becomes more expensive.

>Resilience Investing And don’t forget about your Resilience Fund! That’s the money you’ve left aside to exchange for other forms of capital that will increase your overall resilience. In addition to enhancing your ability to weather future surprises, many of these other types of capital yield excellent financial returns. For example, energy production or efficiency systems often yield tremendous cost savings over their lifetimes. A solar hot water heater can often have a financial ROI well over 100%. Similarly, investing in your health, wellness and fitness (such as a nutritionist consultation, therapist, CrossFit membership, etc) can save you thousands of dollars and perhaps add years to your lifespan.