# Ultralearning
Author: Scott Young  
[Amazon](https://amzn.to/36zJEqt)  
[Goodreads](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/44770129-ultralearning)  

>The idea of taking on an ambitious project—like studying MIT’s undergraduate curriculum in one year or learning a new language every three months—is inspirational to many people. I certainly found these bold projects fascinating. But there was something else about Scott’s projects that resonated with me on a deeper level: he had a bias toward action. This is something I have always appreciated about Scott’s approach and something I believe you will appreciate as a reader of this book. He isn’t focused on simply soaking up knowledge. He is committed to putting that knowledge to use. Approaching learning with an intensity and commitment to action is a hallmark of Scott’s process. This approach speaks to me, in part, because I see similar patterns in my own life and career. Some of my most meaningful experiences have been the result of intense self-directed learning.

>Directness is the practice of learning by directly doing the thing you want to learn. Basically, it’s improvement through active practice rather than through passive learning. The phrases learning something new and practicing something new may seem similar, but these two methods can produce profoundly different results. Passive learning creates knowledge. Active practice creates skill. This is a point that Scott more fully clarifies and refines in chapter 6: directness leads to skill development. You can research the best instructions on the bench press technique, but the only way to build strength is to practice lifting weights. You can read all of the bestselling sales books, but the only way to actually get customers is to practice making sales calls. Learning can be very useful, of course, but the danger is that the act of soaking up new facts can be disconnected from the process of refining a new skill. You can know every fact about an industry and still lack real-world expertise because you haven’t practiced the craft.

>There are nine universal principles that underlie the ultralearning projects described so far. Each embodies a particular aspect of successful learning, and I describe how ultralearners maximize the effectiveness of the principle through the choices they make in their projects. They are: METALEARNING: FIRST DRAW A MAP. Start by learning how to learn the subject or skill you want to tackle. Discover how to do good research and how to draw on your past competencies to learn new skills more easily. FOCUS: SHARPEN YOUR KNIFE. Cultivate the ability to concentrate. Carve out chunks of time when you can focus on learning, and make it easy to just do it. DIRECTNESS: GO STRAIGHT AHEAD. Learn by doing the thing you want to become good at. Don’t trade it off for other tasks, just because those are more convenient or comfortable. DRILL: ATTACK YOUR WEAKEST POINT. Be ruthless in improving your weakest points. Break down complex skills into small parts; then master those parts and build them back together again. RETRIEVAL: TEST TO LEARN. Testing isn’t simply a way of assessing knowledge but a way of creating it. Test yourself before you feel confident, and push yourself to actively recall information rather than passively review it. FEEDBACK: DON’T DODGE THE PUNCHES. Feedback is harsh and uncomfortable. Know how to use it without letting your ego get in the way. Extract the signal from the noise, so you know what to pay attention to and what to ignore. RETENTION: DON’T FILL A LEAKY BUCKET. Understand what you forget and why. Learn to remember things not just for now but forever. INTUITION: DIG DEEP BEFORE BUILDING UP. Develop your intuition through play and exploration of concepts and skills. Understand how understanding works, and don’t recourse to cheap tricks of memorization to avoid deeply knowing things. EXPERIMENTATION: EXPLORE OUTSIDE YOUR COMFORT ZONE. All of these principles are only starting points. True mastery comes not just from following the path trodden by others but from exploring possibilities they haven’t yet imagined.

>What Is Metalearning? The prefix meta comes from the Greek term μετά, meaning “beyond.” It typically signifies when something is “about” itself or deals with a higher layer of abstraction. In this case metalearning means learning about learning. Here’s an example: If you’re learning Chinese characters, you will learn that火 means “fire.” That’s regular learning. You may also learn that Chinese characters are often organized by something called radicals, which indicate what kind of thing the character describes. The character灶, for example which means “stove,” has a火 on the left-hand side to indicate that it has some relationship to fire. Learning this property of Chinese characters is metalearning—not learning about the object of your inquiry itself, in this case words and phrases, but learning about how knowledge is structured and acquired within this subject; in other words, learning how to learn it.

>A first crutch comes from recognizing that most of what is unpleasant in a task (if you are averse to it) or what is pleasant about an alternative task (if you’re drawn to distraction) is an impulse that doesn’t actually last that long. If you actually start working or ignore a potent distractor, it usually only takes a couple minutes until the worry starts to dissolve, even for fairly unpleasant tasks. Therefore, a good first crutch is to convince yourself to get over just the few minutes of maximal unpleasantness before you take a break. Telling yourself that you need to spend only five minutes on the task before you can stop and do something else is often enough to get you started. After all, almost anyone can endure five minutes of anything, no matter how boring, frustrating, or difficult it may be. However, once you start, you may end up continuing for longer without wanting to take the break.

>Flow, a concept pioneered by the psychologist Mihály Csíkszentmihályi, is often used as the model for what ideal focus looks like. This is the state of mind you associate with being “in the zone.” You stop being interrupted by distracting thoughts, and your mind becomes completely absorbed in the task at hand. Flow is the enjoyable state that slides right between boredom and frustration, when a task is neither too hard nor too easy. This rosy picture, however, does have some detractors. The psychologist K. Anders Ericsson, the researcher behind deliberate practice, argues that flow has characteristics that are “inconsistent with the demands of deliberate practice for monitoring explicit goals and feedback and opportunities for error correction. Hence, skilled performers may enjoy and seek out flow experiences as part of their domain-related activities, but such experiences would not occur during deliberate practice.”2

>Problem 3: Failing to Create the Right Kind of Focus A third, problem, subtler than the other two, has to do with the quality and direction of your attention. Supposing you’ve managed to wrangle the problems of procrastination and distraction down long enough to focus on your task, how should you do it? What’s the optimal degree of alertness to maximize your learning? Here there is some interesting research relating two different variables, arousal and task complexity, to the question of how you should apply your attention. Arousal (the general, not sexual, variety) is your overall feeling of energy or alertness. When you’re sleepy, you have low arousal; when you’re exercising, you have high arousal. This bodily phenomenon occurs due to sympathetic nervous system activation, and it consists of a range of effects in the body that often occur together, including faster heart rate, increased blood pressure, pupil dilation, and sweating. Mentally, arousal also influences attention. High arousal creates a feeling of keen alertness, which is often characterized by a fairly narrow range of focus, but one that can also be somewhat brittle.5 This can be very good for focusing on relatively simple tasks or ones that require intense concentration toward a small target. Athletes require this kind of concentration to throw a dart at a target or shoot a basketball properly, where the task is fairly simple but requires concentration to execute properly. Too much arousal, however, and focus starts to suffer.6 It becomes very easy to be distracted, and you may have a hard time holding focus at any particular spot. Anyone who’s drunk too much coffee and feels jittery knows how this can impact your work. More complex tasks, such as solving math problems or writing essays, tend to benefit from a more relaxed kind of focus.7 Here the space of focus is often larger and more diffuse. This has advantages when, in order to solve the problem you’re facing, you must consider many different inputs or ideas. Trying to solve a complex math problem or write a love sonnet is likely to require this mental quietness. When doing a particularly creative task, if you get stuck, you may benefit from no focus at all.8

>Directness is the hallmark of most ultralearning projects.* Roger Craig did his Jeopardy! testing on the actual questions from past shows. Eric Barone learned video game art by making art for his video game. Benny Lewis learns to speak languages quickly by following a policy of attempting some back-and-forth dialog from the very first day. What these approaches share is that the learning activities are always done with a connection to the context in which the skills learned will eventually be used. The opposite of this is the approach so often favored in more traditional classroom-style learning: studying facts, concepts, and skills in a way that is removed from how those things will eventually be applied: mastering formulas before you understand the problem they’re trying to solve; memorizing the vocabulary of a language because it’s written on a list, not because you want to use it; solving highly idealized problems that you’ll never see again after graduation.

>During the MIT Challenge, I recognized that the most important resource for being able to eventually pass the classes wasn’t having access to recorded lectures, it was having access to problem sets. Yet, in the years since this project, when I am asked for help by students, they often decry the absence of lecture videos from some classes, only rarely complaining about incomplete or insufficient problem sets. This makes me think that most students view sitting and listening to a lecture as the main way that they learn the material, with doing problems that look substantially similar to those on the final exam as being a superficial check on their knowledge. Though first covering the material is often essential to begin doing practice, the principle of directness asserts that it’s actually while doing the thing you want to get good at when much of learning takes place.

>Ultimately, it will be for researchers to decide whether the Holy Grail of education will ever be found. In the meantime, as learners, we must accept that initial learning efforts often stick stubbornly to the situations we learn them in. The programmer who learns about an algorithm from a class may have trouble recognizing when to use it in her code. The leader who learns a new management philosophy from a business book may go back to working with the same approach she has always used with her employees. My favorite example, though, has to be when a group of friends invited me to join them at a casino. I asked them if their studies ever kept them from enjoying gambling, and they just looked at me blankly. I thought it was funny because the students were actuaries. Their years spent studying statistics in the classroom should have convinced them that you can’t expect to beat the house, yet that connection didn’t seem to dawn on them.

>How to Learn Directly Given the well-documented difficulty with indirect forms of learning, why are they still the default both in schools and in many failed attempts at self-education? The answer is that learning directly is hard. It is often more frustrating, challenging, and intense than reading a book or sitting through a lecture. But this very difficulty creates a potent source of competitive advantage for any would-be ultralearner. If you’re willing to apply tactics that exploit directness despite these difficulties, you will end up learning much more effectively.

>Tactic 2: Immersive Learning Immersion is the process of surrounding yourself with the target environment in which the skill is practiced. This has the advantage of requiring much larger amounts of practice than would be typical, as well as exposing you to a fuller range of situations in which the skill applies.

>What Should Be Retrieved? The research is clear: if you need to recall something later, you’re best off practicing retrieving it. However, this neglects an important question: What kinds of things should you invest the time in to remember in the first place? Retrieval may take less time than review to get the same learning impact, but not learning something at all is faster still. This is an important practical question. Nobody has time to master everything. During the MIT Challenge, I covered a lot of different ideas. Some were directly relevant to the kind of programming I wanted to do when I was done, so making sure I retained those ideas was a priority. Others were interesting, but since I had no plans to use them immediately, I put more effort into practicing retrieving the underlying concepts than doing technical calculations. One class I did, for instance, was Modal Logic. As I have no plans to be a logician, I can honestly say, eight years later, that I couldn’t prove theorems in modal logic today. However, I can tell you what modal logic is for and when it is used, so if a situation arises in which the techniques I learned in that class might be useful, I’d have a much better time spotting it.* There will always be some things you choose to master and others you satisfy yourself with knowing you can look up if you need to. One way to answer this question is simply to do direct practice. Directness sidesteps this question by forcing you to retrieve the things that come up often in the course of using the skill. If you’re learning a language and need to recall a word, you’ll practice it. If you never need a word, you won’t memorize it. The advantage of this strategy is that it automatically leads you to learn the things with the highest frequency. Things that are rarely used or that are easier to look up than to memorize won’t be retrieved. These tend to be the things that don’t matter so much.

>To the world, he was an eccentric professor and Nobel Prize–winning physicist; to his biographer, he was a genius; but to those who knew him, Richard Feynman was a magician. His colleague the mathematician Mark Kac once posited that the world holds two types of geniuses. The first are ordinary geniuses: “Once we understand what they have done we feel certain that we, too, could have done it.” The other type are magicians, whose minds work in such inscrutable ways that “Even after we understand what they have done, the process by which they have done it is completely dark.” Feynman, by his reckoning, was “a magician of the highest caliber.”1 Feynman could take problems others had worked on for months and immediately see the solution. In high school, he competed in mathematics tournaments, where he would often get the correct answer while the problem was still being stated. While his competitors had just begun to compute, Feynman already had the answer circled on the page. In his college days, he competed in the Putnam Mathematics Competition, with the winner receiving a paid scholarship to Harvard. This competition is notoriously difficult, requiring clever tricks rather than straightforward application of previously learned principles. Time is also a factor, and some examination sessions have a median score of zero, meaning the typical competitor didn’t get even one right. Feynman walked out of the exam early. He scored first place, with his fraternity brothers later being amazed at the drastic gap between Feynman’s score and the next four on the list. During his work on the Manhattan Project, Niels Bohr, then one of the most famous and important living physicists, asked to speak with Feynman directly, to run his ideas by the young grad student before talking with the other physicists. “He’s the only guy who’s not afraid of me” was Bohr’s explanation. “[He] will say when I’ve got a crazy idea.”2 Nor was Feynman’s magic restricted to physics. As a child he went around fixing people’s radios, in part because paying an adult for repairs in the Depression was too costly but also because the radio owners marveled at his process. Once, while he was lost in thought trying to figure out why a radio was producing an awful noise as it started up, the owner of the radio got impatient. “What are you doing? You come to fix the radio, but you’re only walking back and forth!” “I’m thinking!” came the reply, at which the owner, startled at the boldness for which Feynman would later become famous, laughed. “He fixes radios by thinking!”

>Demystifying Feynman’s Magic Feynman was certainly a genius. Many people, including his biographer James Gleick, are satisfied to leave it at that. A magic trick, after all, is most dazzling when you don’t know how it is done. Perhaps this is why many accounts of the man have focused on his magic instead of his method. Though Feynman was quite smart, his magic had its gaps. He excelled in math and physics but was abysmal in the humanities. His college grades in history were in the bottom fifth of his class, in literature in the bottom sixth, and his fine arts grades were worse than those of 93 percent of his fellow students. At one point, he even resorted to cheating on a test to pass. His intelligence, measured while he was in school, scored 125. The average college graduate has a score of 115, which puts Feynman only modestly higher. Perhaps, as has been argued afterward, Feynman’s genius failed to be captured in his IQ score, or it simply was a poorly administered test. However, for someone so celebrated for a mind beyond comprehension, these facts remind us that Feynman was mortal. What about Feynman’s mental calculus? In this case, we have Feynman’s words himself for how he could compute so much faster than the abacus salesman or his mathematician colleagues. The cube root of 1,729.03? Feynman explained, “I happened to know that a cubic foot contains 1728 cubic inches, so the answer is a tiny bit more than 12. The excess, 1.03, is only one part in nearly 2000, and I had learned in calculus that for small fractions, the cube root’s excess is one-third of the number’s excess. So all I had to do was find the fraction 1/1728, and multiply by 4.” The constant e to the power of 1.4? Feynman revealed, “because of radioactivity (mean-life and half-life), I knew the log of 2 to the base e, which is .69315 (so I also knew that e to the power of .7 is nearly equal to 2).” To go to the power of 1.4, he’d just have to multiply that number against itself. “Sheer luck,” he explained.3 The secret was his impressive memory for certain arithmetic results and an intuition with numbers that enabled him to interpolate. However, the lucky picks of his examiners allowed him to leave an impression of a magical ability to calculate.