# Unshakeable
Author: Tony Robbins  
[Amazon](https://amzn.to/3xiqqRa)  
[Goodreads](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/40885164-unshakeable)  

>CORE PRINCIPLE 1: DON’T LOSE

>Warren Buffett’s famous line about his first two rules of investing: “Rule number one: never lose money. Rule number two: never forget rule number one.”

>I don’t look to jump over seven-foot bars: I look around for one-foot bars that I can step over.—WARREN BUFFETT

>The investor’s chief problem—and even his worst enemy—is likely to be himself.—BENJAMIN GRAHAM,

>Warren Buffett says, “The stock market is a device for transferring money from the impatient to the patient.” The Solution: It’s a Marathon, Not a Sprint So here’s the big question: In practical terms, how can you silence your inner speculator and force yourself to be a patient, long-term investor? One person who’s obsessed with this question is Guy Spier, a renowned value investor. Guy began coming to my events two decades ago, and he credits me with inspiring him to model the best investors. He applied this idea by modeling Warren Buffett’s long-term approach to investing. In 2008 Guy and another hedge fund manager even paid $650,100 to charity to have lunch with Buffett! As Guy sees it, one of the biggest barriers to success for most investors is that they get distracted by all the short-term noise on Wall Street. This makes it much harder for them to hold their investments for the long run and harness the awesome power of compounding. For example, they frequently check the performance of their investments, and they listen to TV pundits and market “experts” making useless predictions. “When you check your stock prices or fund prices on your computer every day, you’re feeding candy to your brain,” says Guy. “You get an endorphin hit. You have to realize it’s addictive behavior and just stop doing it. Move away from the candy!” Guy suggests checking your portfolio only once a year. He recommends avoiding financial TV entirely. And he suggests that you disregard all research produced by Wall Street firms, recognizing that their motive is to push products, not to share wisdom! “The vast majority of what purports to be analysis and information about the stock market is actually just designed to generate activity, to get us to pull the trigger because somebody out there will make money out of the fact that we’re being active,” he explains. “If it’s activity-generating information, we should shut it off.” Instead, Guy recommends creating “a more wholesome information diet” by studying the wisdom of ultrapatient investors such as Warren Buffett and Jack Bogle. The result? “You’re feeding your mind thoughts that will make it much easier for you to think and act long term.”

>Every day, think as you wake up, “Today I am fortunate to be alive, I have a precious human life, I am not going to waste it.”—THE DALAI LAMA

>The first tool is what I call “the 90-second rule.” Whenever I start to suffer, I give myself 90 seconds to stop it so that I can return to living in a beautiful state. Sounds good, right? But how do you actually do it? Let’s say I’m having an intense conversation with an employee at one of my companies and discover that he or she has made a mistake that could cause an array of problems. Naturally, my brain leaps into danger detection mode, launches that ancient survival software, and starts bombarding me with thoughts about all the ways I and our whole team might suffer as a result. In the past, I could have easily been swept up in a whirlwind of worry, frustration, or anger—a maelstrom of mental suffering! But here’s what I do now. As soon as I feel the tension rising in my body, I catch myself. And the way that I catch myself is really simple: I gently breathe and slow things down. I step out of the situation and start to distance myself from all those stressful thoughts that my brain is generating. It’s natural for these thoughts to arise, but they’re just thoughts. When you slow down, you realize that you don’t have to believe these thoughts or identify with them. You can step back and say to yourself, “Wow, look at that crazy thought go by! There goes that crazy mind again!” Why is this helpful? Because the problem isn’t the existence of our negative, destructive, and limiting thoughts—everyone has those! What hurts us is the habit of believing those thoughts. For example, have you ever found yourself getting so mad at someone that you started to think, “Man, I really want to throttle this guy! I could kill him!” I’m guessing that you didn’t actually do it. Why? Because you didn’t believe the thought. At least, I hope you didn’t! Once I’ve detached myself from these unwanted thoughts, I start to focus my mind on finding something to appreciate. The survival brain is always searching for what’s wrong, but there’s always something to appreciate. As I always say, “What’s wrong is always available . . . but so is what’s right!” Maybe it’s the simple fact that I’m alive and well, that I’m still breathing! Maybe it’s the fact that the person who made the mistake is a beautiful human being who works hard and has the best intentions. Maybe it’s the fact that I have the awareness to see that I’m suffering, which gives me the ability to stop and let it go immediately. It doesn’t matter what you appreciate. What matters is that by shifting your focus to appreciation, you slow down your survival mechanism. Love, joy, and giving, will all trigger the same positive transformation. This shift in your focus creates space for your spirit to enter the game, so you don’t get stuck inside your head. If you keep doing this with real consistency, you actually rewire your nervous system, training your mind to find the good in every situation, so your experience of life is one of thankfulness and joy.

>And you know what? There’s power in happiness. There’s a happiness advantage in life. Happiness is an advantage in your relationships, your business, your health, and in everything you touch. Living in a beautiful state no matter what is the ultimate freedom and the ultimate gift that you can give to those you love. It’s the experience of absolute abundance—and abundance of joy!—that is true wealth. Even better, you can possess this abundance now, instead of having to wait until you acquire a certain amount of money! And the good news is, this decision rests entirely in your hands. You alone can give yourself this happiness edge.