# The Whole-Brain Child
Author: Daniel Siegel  
[Amazon](https://amzn.to/3jaDNhr)  
[Goodreads](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/10353369-the-whole-brain-child)  

>Take a moment and ask yourself: What do you really want for your children? What qualities do you hope they develop and take into their adult lives? Most likely you want them to be happy, independent, and successful. You want them to enjoy fulfilling relationships and live a life full of meaning and purpose. Now think about what percentage of your time you spend intentionally developing these qualities in your children. If you’re like most parents, you worry that you spend too much time just trying to get through the day (and sometimes the next five minutes) and not enough time creating experiences that help your children thrive, both today and in the future.

>If any of this sounds familiar, we’ve got great news for you: the moments you are just trying to survive are actually opportunities to help your child thrive. At times you may feel that the loving, important moments (like having a meaningful conversation about compassion or character) are separate from the parenting challenges (like fighting another homework battle or dealing with another meltdown). But they are not separate at all. When your child is disrespectful and talks back to you, when you are asked to come in for a meeting with the principal, when you find crayon scribbles all over your wall: these are survive moments, no question about it. But at the same time, they are opportunities—even gifts—because a survive moment is also a thrive moment, where the important, meaningful work of parenting takes place. For example, think about a situation you often just try to get through. Maybe when your kids are fighting with each other for the third time within three minutes. (Not too hard to imagine, is it?) Instead of just breaking up the fight and sending the sparring siblings to different rooms, you can use the argument as an opportunity for teaching: about reflective listening and hearing another person’s point of view; about clearly and respectfully communicating your own desires; about compromise, sacrifice, negotiation, and forgiveness. We know: it sounds hard to imagine in the heat of the moment. But when you understand a little bit about your children’s emotional needs and mental states, you can create this kind of positive outcome—even without United Nations peacekeeping forces. There’s nothing wrong with separating your kids when they’re fighting. It’s a good survival technique, and in certain situations it may be the best solution. But often we can do better than just ending the conflict and noise. We can transform the experience into one that develops not only each child’s brain but also her relationship skills and her character. Over time, the siblings will each continue to grow and become more proficient at handling conflict without parental guidance. This will be just one of the many ways you can help them thrive. What’s great about this survive-and-thrive approach is that you don’t have to try to carve out special time to help your children thrive. You can use all of the interactions you share—the stressful, angry ones as well as the miraculous, adorable ones—as opportunities to help them become the responsible, caring, capable people you want them to be.

>EEA WOO WOO One day Marianna received a call at work telling her that her two-year-old son, Marco, had been in a car accident with his babysitter. Marco was fine, but the babysitter, who was driving, had been taken to the hospital in an ambulance. Marianna, a principal at an elementary school, frantically rushed to the scene of the accident, where she was told that the babysitter had experienced an epileptic seizure while driving. Marianna found a firefighter unsuccessfully attempting to console her toddler. She took Marco in her arms, and he immediately began to calm down as she comforted him. As soon as he stopped crying, Marco began telling Marianna what had happened. Using his two-year-old language, which only his parents and babysitter would be able to understand, Marco continually repeated the phrase “Eea woo woo.” “Eea” is his word for “Sophia,” the name of his beloved babysitter, and “woo woo” refers to his version of the siren on a fire truck (or in this case, an ambulance). By repeatedly telling his mother “Eea woo woo,” Marco was focusing on the detail of the story that mattered most to him: Sophia had been taken away from him. In a situation like this, many of us would be tempted to assure Marco that Sophia would be fine, then immediately focus on something else to get the child’s mind off the situation: “Let’s go get some ice cream!” In the days that followed, many parents would try to avoid upsetting their child by not discussing the accident. The problem with the “let’s go get some ice cream” approach is that it leaves the child confused about what happened and why. He is still full of big and scary emotions, but he isn’t allowed (or helped) to deal with them in an effective way. Marianna didn’t make that mistake. She had taken Tina’s classes on parenting and the brain, and she immediately put what she knew to good use. That night and over the next week, when Marco’s mind continually brought him back to the car crash, Marianna helped him retell the story over and over again. She’d say, “Yes, you and Sophia were in an accident, weren’t you?” At this point, Marco would stretch out his arms and shake them, imitating Sophia’s seizure. Marianna would continue, “Yes, Sophia had a seizure and started shaking, and the car crashed, didn’t it?” Marco’s next statement was, of course, the familiar “Eea woo woo,” to which Marianna would respond, “That’s right. The woo woo came and took Sophia to the doctor. And now she’s all better. Remember when we went to see her yesterday? She’s doing just fine, isn’t she?” In allowing Marco to repeatedly retell the story, Marianna was helping him understand what had happened so he could begin to deal with it emotionally. Since she knew the importance of helping her son’s brain process the frightening experience, she helped him tell and retell the events so that he could process his fear and go on with his daily routines in a healthy and balanced way. Over the next few days, Marco brought up the accident less and less, until it became just another of his life experiences—albeit an important one. As you read the following pages, you’ll learn specifics about why Marianna responded as she did, and why, both practically and neurologically, it was so helpful to her son. You’ll be able to apply your new knowledge about the brain in numerous ways that make parenting your own child more manageable and meaningful. The concept at the heart of Marianna’s response, and of this book, is integration. A clear understanding of integration will give you the power to completely transform the way you think about parenting your kids. It can help you enjoy them more and better prepare them to live emotionally rich and rewarding lives.

>WHAT IS INTEGRATION AND WHY DOES IT MATTER? Most of us don’t think about the fact that our brain has many different parts with different jobs. For example, you have a left side of the brain that helps you think logically and organize thoughts into sentences, and a right side that helps you experience emotions and read nonverbal cues. You also have a “reptile brain” that allows you to act instinctually and make split-second survival decisions, and a “mammal brain” that leads you toward connection and relationships. One part of your brain is devoted to dealing with memory; another to making moral and ethical decisions. It’s almost as if your brain has multiple personalities—some rational, some irrational; some reflective, some reactive. No wonder we can seem like different people at different times! The key to thriving is to help these parts work well together—to integrate them. Integration takes the distinct parts of your brain and helps them work together as a whole. It’s similar to what happens in the body, which has different organs to perform different jobs: the lungs breathe air, the heart pumps blood, the stomach digests food. For the body to be healthy, these organs all need to be integrated. In other words, they each need to do their individual job while also working together as a whole. Integration is simply that: linking different elements together to make a well-functioning whole. Just as with the healthy functioning of the body, your brain can’t perform at its best unless its different parts work together in a coordinated and balanced way. That’s what integration does: it coordinates and balances the separate regions of the brain that it links together. It’s easy to see when our kids aren’t integrated—they become overwhelmed by their emotions, confused and chaotic. They can’t respond calmly and capably to the situation at hand. Tantrums, meltdowns, aggression, and most of the other challenging experiences of parenting—and life—are a result of a loss of integration, also known as dis-integration.

>We want to help our children become better integrated so they can use their whole brain in a coordinated way. For example, we want them to be horizontally integrated, so that their left-brain logic can work well with their right-brain emotion. We also want them to be vertically integrated, so that the physically higher parts of their brain, which let them thoughtfully consider their actions, work well with the lower parts, which are more concerned with instinct, gut reactions, and survival.

>That’s what we want to do for each of our kids: help their brain become more integrated so they can use their mental resources to full capacity. This is exactly what Marianna did for Marco. When she helped him retell the story over and over again (“Eea woo woo”), she defused the scary and traumatic emotions in his right brain so that they didn’t rule him. She did so by bringing in factual details and logic from his left brain—which, at two years old, is just beginning to develop—so that he could deal with the accident in a way that made sense to him. If his mother hadn’t helped him tell and understand the story, Marco’s fears would have been left unresolved and could have surfaced in other ways. He might have developed a phobia about riding in cars or being separated from his parents, or his right brain might have raged out of control in other ways, causing him to tantrum frequently. Instead, by telling the story with Marco, Marianna helped focus his attention both on the actual details of the accident and on his emotions, which allowed him to use both the left and right sides of his brain together, literally strengthening their connection. (We’ll explain this particular concept much more fully in chapter 2.) By helping him become better integrated, he could return to being a normal, developing two-year-old rather than dwelling on the fear and distress he had experienced.

>Let’s look at another example. Now that you and your siblings are adults, do you still fight over who gets to push the button for the elevator? Of course not. (Well, we hope not.) But do your kids squabble and bicker over this kind of issue? If they’re typical kids, they do. The reason behind this difference brings us back to the brain and integration. Sibling rivalry is like so many other issues that make parenting difficult—tantrums, disobedience, homework battles, discipline matters, and so on. As we’ll explain in the coming chapters, these everyday parenting challenges result from a lack of integration within your child’s brain. The reason her brain isn’t always capable of integration is simple: it hasn’t had time to develop. In fact, it’s got a long way to go, since a person’s brain isn’t considered fully developed until she reaches her mid-twenties.

>So that’s the bad news: you have to wait for your child’s brain to develop. That’s right. No matter how brilliant you think your preschooler is, she does not have the brain of a ten-year-old, and won’t for several years. The rate of brain maturation is largely influenced by the genes we inherit. But the degree of integration may be exactly what we can influence in our day-to-day parenting. The good news is that by using everyday moments, you can influence how well your child’s brain grows toward integration. First, you can develop the diverse elements of your child’s brain by offering opportunities to exercise them. Second, you can facilitate integration so that the separate parts become better connected and work together in powerful ways. This isn’t making your children grow up more quickly—it’s simply helping them develop the many parts of themselves and integrate them. We’re also not talking about wearing yourself (and your kids) out by frantically trying to fill every experience with significance and meaning. We’re talking about simply being present with your children so you can help them become better integrated. As a result, they will thrive emotionally, intellectually, and socially. An integrated brain results in improved decision making, better control of body and emotions, fuller self-understanding, stronger relationships, and success in school. And it all begins with the experiences parents and other caregivers provide, which lay the groundwork for integration and mental health.

>LEFT BRAIN, RIGHT BRAIN: AN INTRODUCTION You probably know that your brain is divided into two hemispheres. Not only are these two sides of the brain anatomically separate; they also function very differently. Some people even say that the two hemispheres have their own distinct personalities, each side with a “mind of its own.” The scientific community refers to the way the different sides of the brain influence us as left-hemisphere and right-hemisphere modalities. But for simplicity’s sake, we’ll just go with the common usage and talk about your left brain and your right brain. Your left brain loves and desires order. It is logical, literal, linguistic (it likes words), and linear (it puts things in a sequence or order). The left brain loves that all four of these words begin with the letter L. (It also loves lists.) The right brain, on the other hand, is holistic and nonverbal, sending and receiving signals that allow us to communicate, such as facial expressions, eye contact, tone of voice, posture, and gestures. Instead of details and order, our right brain cares about the big picture—the meaning and feel of an experience—and specializes in images, emotions, and personal memories. We get a “gut feeling” or “heart-felt sense” from our right brain. Some say the right brain is more intuitive and emotional, and we’ll use those terms in the following pages as a helpful shorthand to talk about what the right brain does. But keep in mind that technically, it’s more accurate to talk about this side of the brain as more directly influenced by the body and lower brain areas, which allow it to receive and interpret emotional information. It can get complicated, but the basic idea is that while the left brain is logical, linguistic, and literal, the right brain is emotional, nonverbal, experiential, and autobiographical—and it doesn’t care at all that these words don’t begin with the same letter. You might think of it this way: the left brain cares about the letter of the law (more of those L’s). As you know, as kids get older they get really good at using this left-brain thinking: “I didn’t shove her! I pushed her.” The right brain, on the other hand, cares about the spirit of the law, the emotions and experiences of relationships. The left focuses on the text—the right is about the context. It was the nonlogical, emotional right brain that prompted Katie to yell to her father, “I’ll die if you leave me!” In terms of development, very young children are right-hemisphere dominant, especially during their first three years. They haven’t mastered the ability to use logic and words to express their feelings, and they live their lives completely in the moment—which is why they will drop everything to squat down and fully absorb themselves in watching a ladybug crawl along the sidewalk, not caring one bit that they are late for their toddler music class. Logic, responsibilities, and time don’t exist for them yet. But when a toddler begins asking “Why?” all the time, you know that the left brain is beginning to really kick in. Why? Because our left brain likes to know the linear cause-effect relationships in the world—and to express that logic with language.

>TWO HALVES MAKE A WHOLE: COMBINING THE LEFT AND THE RIGHT In order to live balanced, meaningful, and creative lives full of connected relationships, it’s crucial that our two hemispheres work together. The very architecture of the brain is designed this way. For example, the corpus callosum is a bundle of fibers that runs along the center of the brain, connecting the right hemisphere with the left. The communication that takes place between the two sides of our brain is conducted across these fibers, allowing the two hemispheres to work as a team—which is exactly what we want for our kids. We want them to become horizontally integrated, so that the two sides of their brain can act in harmony. That way, our children will value both their logic and their emotions; they will be well balanced and able to understand themselves and the world at large.

>Think about our emotions, for example. They’re absolutely crucial if we are to live meaningfully, but we don’t want them to completely rule our lives. If our right brain took over and we ignored the logic of our left brain, we would feel like we were drowning in images, bodily sensations, and what could feel like an emotional flood. But at the same time, we don’t want to use only our left brain, divorcing our logic and language from our feelings and personal experiences. That would feel like living in an emotional desert. The goal is to avoid living in an emotional flood or an emotional desert. We want to allow our nonrational images, autobiographical memories, and vital emotions to play their important roles, but we also want to integrate them with the parts of ourselves that give our lives order and structure. When Katie freaked out about being left at preschool, she was working mostly from her right brain. As a result, Thomas witnessed an illogical emotional flood, where Katie’s emotional right brain wasn’t working in a coordinated way with her logical left brain.

>Here it’s important to note that it’s not only our children’s emotional floods that cause problems. An emotional desert, where feelings and the right brain are ignored or denied, is no healthier than a flood. We see this response more often in older children. For example, Dan tells a story of an exchange with a twelve-year-old girl who came to see him with a scenario many of us have experienced: Amanda mentioned a fight she’d had with her best friend. I knew from her mother that this argument had been extremely painful for Amanda, but as she talked about it, she just shrugged and stared out the window, saying, “I don’t really care if we never talk again. She annoys me anyway.” The expression on her face seemed cold and resigned, but in the subtle quiver of her lower lips and the gentle opening and closing of her eyelids, almost like a tremor, I could sense the right-hemisphere nonverbal signals revealing what we might call her “real feelings.” Rejection is painful, and at this moment, Amanda’s way of dealing with that sense of vulnerability was to “retreat to the left,” running to the arid (but predictable and controllable) emotional desert of the left side of her brain. I had to help her understand that even though it was painful to think about the conflict with her friend, she needed to pay attention to, and even honor, what was going on in her right brain, since the right brain is more directly connected to our bodily sensations and the input from lower parts of the brain that combine together to create our emotions. In this way, all of the imagery, sensations, and autobiographical memories from the right are infused with emotion. When we’re upset, it can feel safer to withdraw from this unpredictable right-sided awareness and retreat into the more predictable and controlled logical land of the left. The key to helping Amanda was for me to attune to those real feelings gently. I didn’t point out abruptly that she was hiding, even from herself, how this important person in her life had hurt her. Instead, I allowed myself to feel what she was feeling, then tried to communicate from my right brain to her right brain. Using my facial expressions and posture, I let her know that I was really tuning in to her emotions. That attunement helped her “feel felt”—to know that she was not alone, that I was interested in what she was feeling inside, not only what she was doing on the outside. Then, once we had established this sense of connection between us, words came more naturally for both of us, and we could begin to get to the bottom of what was going on inside of her. By asking her to tell the story about the fight with her best friend and having her pause the story at different times to observe subtle shifts in her feelings, I was able to reintroduce Amanda to her real emotions and to help her deal with them in a productive way. This is how I tried to connect with both her right brain with its feelings, bodily sensations, and images and with her left brain, with its words and ability to tell the linear story of her experience. When we see how this happens in the brain, we can understand how linking the two sides to each other can completely change the outcome of an interaction.

>We don’t want our children to hurt. But we also want them to do more than simply get through their difficult times; we want them to face their troubles and grow from them. When Amanda retreated to the left, hiding from all of the painful emotions that were running through her right brain, she denied an important part of herself that she needed to acknowledge. Denial of our emotions isn’t the only danger we face when we rely too heavily on our left brain. We can also become too literal, leaving us without a sense of perspective, where we miss the meaning that comes from putting things in context (a specialty of the right brain). This is part of what causes your eight-year-old to become defensive and angry sometimes when you innocently joke around with her. Remember that the right brain is in charge of reading nonverbal cues. So especially if she is tired or moody, she might focus only on your words and miss your playful tone of voice and the wink that went with it.

>What You Can Do: Helping Your Child Work from Both Sides of the Brain Whole-Brain Strategy #1: Connect and Redirect: Surfing Emotional Waves One night Tina’s seven-year-old son reappeared in the living room shortly after going to bed, explaining that he couldn’t sleep. He was clearly upset and explained, “I’m mad that you never leave me a note in the middle of the night!” Surprised at this unusual outburst, Tina replied, “I didn’t know you wanted me to.” His response was to unleash a whole litany of rapid-fire complaints: “You never do anything nice for me, and I’m mad because my birthday isn’t for ten more months, and I hate homework!” Logical? No. Familiar? Yes. All parents experience times when their children say things and get upset about issues that don’t seem to make sense. An encounter like this can be frustrating, especially when you expect your child to be old enough to act rationally and hold a logical conversation. All of a sudden, though, he becomes upset about something ridiculous, and it seems that absolutely no amount of reasoning on your part will help. Based on our knowledge of the two sides of the brain, we know that Tina’s son was experiencing big waves of right-brain emotions without much left-brain logical balance. At a moment like this, one of the least effective things Tina could do would be to jump right in and defend herself (“Of course I do nice things for you!”) or to argue with her son about his faulty logic (“There’s nothing I can do about making your birthday come sooner. As for the homework, that’s just something that you’ve got to do”). This type of left-brain, logical response would hit an unreceptive right-brain brick wall and create a gulf between them. After all, his logical left brain was nowhere to be found at that moment. So, had Tina responded with her left, her son would have felt like she didn’t understand him or care about his feelings. He was in a right-brain, nonrational, emotional flood, and a left-brain response would have been a lose-lose approach. Even though it was practically automatic (and very tempting) to ask him “What are you talking about?” or to tell him to go back to bed immediately, Tina stopped herself. Instead she used the connect-and-redirect technique. She pulled him close, rubbed his back, and with a nurturing tone of voice, said, “Sometimes it’s just really hard, isn’t it? I would never forget about you. You are always in my mind, and I always want you to know how special you are to me.” She held him while he explained that he sometimes feels that his younger brother gets more of her attention, and that homework takes too much of his free time. As he spoke, she could feel him relax and soften. He felt heard and cared for. Then she briefly addressed the specific issues he had brought up, since he was now more receptive to problem solving and planning, and they agreed to talk more in the morning.

>Whole-Brain Strategy #1: Connect and Redirect: Surfing Emotional Waves

>This story points out an important insight: when a child is upset, logic often won’t work until we have responded to the right brain’s emotional needs. We call this emotional connection “attunement,” which is how we connect deeply with another person and allow them to “feel felt.” When parent and child are tuned in to each other, they experience a sense of joining together. Tina’s approach with her son is one that we call the “connect and redirect” method, and it begins with helping our kids “feel felt” before we try to solve problems or address the situation logically. Here’s how it works: Step 1: Connect with the Right In our society, we’re trained to work things out using our words and our logic. But when your four-year-old is absolutely furious because he can’t walk on the ceiling like Spider-Man (as Tina’s son once was), that’s probably not the best time to give him an introductory lesson in the laws of physics. Or when your eleven-year-old is feeling hurt because it seems that his sister is receiving preferential treatment (as Dan’s son felt on occasion), the appropriate response isn’t to get out a scorecard showing that you reprimand each of your children in equal measure. Instead, we can use these opportunities to realize that at these moments, logic isn’t our primary vehicle for bringing some sort of sanity to the conversation. (Seems counterintuitive, doesn’t it?) It’s also crucial to keep in mind that no matter how nonsensical and frustrating our child’s feelings may seem to us, they are real and important to our child. It’s vital that we treat them as such in our response. During Tina’s conversation with her son, she appealed to his right brain by acknowledging his feelings. She also used nonverbal signals like physical touch, empathetic facial expressions, a nurturing tone of voice, and nonjudgmental listening. In other words, she used her right brain to connect and communicate with his right brain. This right-to-right attunement helped bring his brain into balance, or into a more integrated state. Then she could begin to appeal to her son’s left brain and address the specific issues he had raised. In other words, then it was time for step 2, which helps to integrate the left and the right. Step 2: Redirect with the Left After responding with the right, Tina could then redirect with the left. She could redirect him by logically explaining how hard she works to be fair, by promising to leave a note while he slept, and by strategizing with him about his next birthday and about how to make homework more fun. (They did some of this that night, but most of it came the following day.) Once she had connected with him right brain to right brain, it was much easier to connect left to left and deal with the issues in a rational manner. By first connecting with his right brain, she could then redirect with the left brain through logical explanation and planning, which required that his left hemisphere join the conversation. This approach allowed him to use both sides of his brain in an integrated, coordinated way. We’re not saying that “connect and redirect” will always do the trick. After all, there are times when a child is simply past the point of no return and the emotional waves just need to crash until the storm passes. Or the child may simply need to eat or get some sleep. Like Tina, you might decide to wait until your child is in a more integrated state of mind to talk logically with him about his feelings and behaviors.

>We’re also not recommending permissiveness or letting your boundaries slide simply because a child isn’t thinking logically. Rules about respect and behavior aren’t thrown out the window simply because a child’s left hemisphere is disengaged. For example, whatever behavior is inappropriate in your family—being disrespectful, hurting someone, throwing things—should remain off-limits even in moments of high emotion. You may need to stop destructive behavior and remove your child from the situation before you begin to connect and redirect. But with the whole-brain approach, we understand that it’s generally a good idea to discuss misbehavior and its consequences after the child has calmed down, since moments of emotional flooding are not the best times for lessons to be learned.

>Whole-Brain Strategy #2: Name It to Tame It: Telling Stories to Calm Big Emotions

>Whole-Brain Strategy #2: Name It to Tame It: Telling Stories to Calm Big Emotions A toddler falls and scrapes an elbow. A kindergartner loses a beloved pet. A fifth-grader faces a bully at school. When a child experiences painful, disappointing, or scary moments, it can be overwhelming, with big emotions and bodily sensations flooding the right brain. When this happens, we as parents can help bring the left hemisphere into the picture so that the child can begin to understand what’s happening. One of the best ways to promote this type of integration is to help retell the story of the frightening or painful experience.

>There may be times when our kids won’t want to tell the story when we ask them to. We need to respect their desires about how and when to talk—especially because pressuring them to share will only backfire. (Think about the times you prefer solitude and don’t feel like talking—does prodding ever entice you to talk and share your inner feelings?) Instead, we can gently encourage them by beginning the story and asking them to fill in the details, and if they’re not interested, we can give them space and talk later. Your child is more likely to be responsive if you are strategic about when you initiate this type of conversation. Make sure you are both in a good frame of mind. Seasoned parents and child therapists will also tell you that some of the best conversations with children take place while something else is happening. Children are much more apt to share and talk while building something, playing cards, or riding in the car than when you sit down and look them right in the face and ask them to open up. Another approach you can take if your child doesn’t feel like talking is to ask her to draw a picture of the event or, if she’s old enough, write about it. If you sense that she is reluctant to talk to you, encourage her to talk to someone else—a friend, another adult, or even a sibling who will be a good listener.

>Even children much younger than Katie—as young as ten to twelve months—respond well to telling stories. For example, imagine a toddler who’s fallen down and skinned her knee. Her right brain, which is completely in the present moment and in touch with her body and fear, feels pain. On some level, she worries that the pain may never go away. When the mother retells the story of the fall, putting words and order to the experience, she helps her daughter engage and develop her left brain, explaining what happened—she simply fell down—so that she can understand why she’s hurting.

>One of the most important skills we can teach our kids is to make good decisions in high-emotion situations like the one Grant faced here. We want them to pause before acting, to consider consequences, to think about the feelings of others, to make ethical and moral judgments. Sometimes they come through with the kind of behavior that makes us proud. And sometimes they don’t.

>THE MENTAL STAIRCASE: INTEGRATING THE UPSTAIRS AND DOWNSTAIRS BRAIN We can talk about the brain in many ways. In chapter 2, we focused on its two hemispheres, the left and the right. Now we want to look at it from top to bottom, or actually from bottom to top. Imagine that your brain is a house, with both a downstairs and an upstairs. The downstairs brain includes the brain stem and the limbic region, which are located in the lower parts of the brain, from the top of your neck to about the bridge of your nose. Scientists talk about these lower areas as being more primitive because they are responsible for basic functions (like breathing and blinking), for innate reactions and impulses (like fight and flight), and for strong emotions (like anger and fear). Whenever you instinctually flinch because a Little League foul ball flies into the stands, your downstairs brain is doing its job. The same goes for when your face goes red with fury because, after twenty minutes of convincing your kindergartner that the dentist’s office won’t be scary, the dental assistant enters the room and announces in front of your daughter, “We’ll need to give her a shot to numb her.” Your anger—along with other strong emotions and bodily functions and instincts—springs from your downstairs brain. It’s like the first floor of a house, where so many of a family’s basic needs are met. There you’ll almost always find a kitchen, a dining room, a bathroom, and so on. Basic necessities get taken care of downstairs.

>Your upstairs brain is completely different. It’s made up of the cerebral cortex and its various parts—particularly the ones directly behind your forehead, including what’s called the middle prefrontal cortex. Unlike your more basic downstairs brain, the upstairs brain is more evolved and can give you a fuller perspective on your world. You might imagine it as a light-filled second-story study or library full of windows and skylights that allow you to see things more clearly. This is where more intricate mental processes take place, like thinking, imagining, and planning. Whereas the downstairs brain is primitive, the upstairs brain is highly sophisticated, controlling some of your most important higher-order and analytical thinking. Because of its sophistication and complexity, it is responsible for producing many of the characteristics we hope to see in our kids: Sound decision making and planning Control over emotions and body Self-understanding Empathy Morality

>When a fully functioning staircase is in place, the upper and lower parts of the brain are vertically integrated. That means that the upstairs can monitor the actions of the downstairs and help calm the strong reactions, impulses, and emotions that originate there. But vertical integration works in the other direction, too, with the downstairs brain and the body (the house’s foundation) making important “bottom-up” contributions. After all, we don’t want significant upstairs decisions being made in some sort of vacuum that’s devoid of input from our emotions, our instincts, and our bodies. Instead, we need to consider our emotional and physical feelings—which originate downstairs—before using the upstairs to decide on a course of action.

>When your three-year-old erupts in anger because there are no orange Popsicles left in the freezer, his downstairs brain, including the brain stem and amygdala, has sprung into action and latched the baby gate. This primitive part of his brain has received an intense surge of energy, leaving him literally unable to act calmly and reasonably. Massive brain resources have rushed to his downstairs brain, leaving little to power his upstairs brain. As a result, no matter how many times you tell him that you have plenty of purple Popsicles (which he liked better than orange last time anyway), he’s probably not going to listen to reason in this moment. He’s much more likely to throw something or yell at anyone nearby. As you know if you’ve found yourself in this situation, the best way to ease him through this crisis (and in his mind it really is a crisis) is to soothe him and help him shift his attention.

>TANTRUMS: UPSTAIRS AND DOWNSTAIRS

>Most parents have been taught that there’s only one good way to respond to a tantrum: ignore it. Otherwise, you communicate to your child that she has a powerful weapon to wield against you, and she will wield it over and over again. But what does this new knowledge about the brain say about tantrums? When you know about the upstairs and downstairs brain, you can also see that there are really two different types of tantrums. An upstairs tantrum occurs when a child essentially decides to throw a fit. She makes a conscious choice to act out, to push buttons and terrorize you until she get what she wants. Despite her dramatic and seemingly heartfelt pleas, she could instantly stop the tantrum if she wanted to—for instance, if you gave in to her demands or reminded her that she is about to lose a cherished privilege. The reason she can stop is that she is using her upstairs brain at that moment. She is able to control her emotions and body, to be logical and make good decisions. She may look like she’s completely out of control as she screams in the middle of the mall, “I want those princess slippers now!” But you can see that she knows what she’s doing, and that she’s definitely working from strategy and manipulation to achieve a desired end: that you drop everything and immediately buy the slippers. A parent who recognizes an upstairs tantrum is left with one clear response: never negotiate with a terrorist. An upstairs tantrum calls for firm boundaries and a clear discussion about appropriate and inappropriate behavior. A good response in this situation would be to calmly explain, “I understand that you’re excited about the slippers, but I don’t like the way you’re acting. If you don’t stop now, you won’t get the slippers, and I’ll need to cancel your playdate this afternoon, because you’re showing me that you’re not able to handle yourself well.” Then it’s important to follow through on those consequences if the behavior doesn’t stop. By providing this type of firm limit, you’re giving your daughter practice at seeing the consequences of her inappropriate actions, and at learning to control her impulses. You’re teaching her that respectful communication, patience, and delayed gratification pay off—and that contrary behaviors don’t. Important lessons for a developing brain. If you refuse to give in to upstairs tantrums—regardless of the age of your child—you’ll stop seeing them on a regular basis. Since upstairs tantrums are intentional, children will stop returning to that particular strategy when they learn that it’s ineffective—and often even leads to negative results.

>A downstairs tantrum is completely different. Here, a child becomes so upset that he’s no longer able to use his upstairs brain. Your toddler becomes so angry that you poured water on his head to wash his hair that he begins screaming, throwing toys out of the tub, and wildly swinging his fists, trying to hit you. In this case, the lower parts of his brain—in particular his amygdala—take over and hijack his upstairs brain. He’s not even close to being in a state of integration. In fact, the stress hormones flooding his little body mean that virtually no part of his higher brain is fully functioning. As a result, he’s literally incapable—momentarily, at least—of controlling his body or emotions, and of using all of those higher-order thinking skills, like considering consequences, solving problems, or considering others’ feelings. He’s flipped his lid. The baby gate is blocking access to the upstairs, and he simply can’t use his whole brain. (When you later tell someone that your child “totally lost his mind,” you’ll actually be more neurologically accurate than you realize!) When your child is in this state of dis-integration and a full-blown downstairs tantrum has erupted, a completely different parental response is called for. Whereas a child throwing an upstairs tantrum needs a parent to quickly set firm boundaries, an appropriate response to a downstairs tantrum is much more nurturing and comforting. As in the “connect and redirect” technique we discussed in chapter 2, the first thing a parent needs to do is to connect with the child and help him calm himself down. This can often be accomplished through loving touch and a soothing tone of voice. Or, if he has gone so far that he’s in danger of hurting himself or someone else or destroying property, you may have to hold him close and calmly talk him down as you remove him from the scene.

>Whole-Brain Strategy #4: Use It or Lose It: Exercising the Upstairs Brain

>Empathy Empathy is another important function of the upstairs brain. When you ask simple questions that encourage the consideration of another’s feelings, you are building your child’s ability to feel empathy. At a restaurant: “Why do you think that baby is crying?” While you’re reading together: “How do you think Melinda is feeling now that her friend moved away?” Leaving the store: “That woman wasn’t very nice to us, was she? Do you think something might have happened to her that made her feel sad today?” Simply by drawing your child’s attention to other people’s emotions during everyday encounters, you can open up whole new levels of compassion within them and exercise their upstairs brain. Scientists are beginning more and more to think that empathy has its roots in a complex system of what are being called mirror neurons, which we’ll discuss in the next chapter. The more you give your child’s upstairs brain practice at thinking of others, the more capable he will be of having compassion.

>Another way to exercise this part of the brain is to offer hypothetical situations, which kids often love: Would it be OK to run a red light if there was an emergency? If a bully was picking on someone at school and there were no adults around, what would you do? The point is to challenge your children to think about how they act, and to consider the implications of their decisions. In doing so, you give your kids practice thinking through moral and ethical principles, which, with your guidance, will become the foundation for the way they make decisions for the rest of their lives. And, of course, consider what you are modeling with your own behavior. As you teach them about honesty, generosity, kindness, and respect, make sure that they see you living a life that embodies those values as well. The examples you set, for good and for bad, will significantly impact the way your child’s upstairs brain develops.

>Whole-Brain Strategy #5: Move It or Lose It: Moving the Body to Avoid Losing the Mind

>Then all of a sudden, he jumped out from under the bean bag chair, ran downstairs, ran out the front door, and kept running. He ran several blocks through the neighborhood before coming home. When we had him safely back in the house, and he had calmed down and had a snack, I was able to talk with him and ask why he had taken off like that. He said he didn’t really know. He said, “The only thing I can think of is that I felt like it would make me feel better if I ran as fast as I could for as long as I could. And it did.” And I have to admit—he did seem a lot more calm, and ready to have me help him with his homework. Even though Liam didn’t know it, when he left the house and ran, he was practicing integration. His downstairs brain had bullied his upstairs brain into submission, leaving him feeling overwhelmed and helpless. He had floated way over near the chaos bank of the river. His mother’s attempts to help bring in his upstairs brain were unsuccessful, but when Liam brought his body into the conversation, something changed in his brain. After a few minutes of exercise, he was able to calm his amygdala and give control back to his upstairs brain. Studies support Liam and his spontaneous strategy. Research shows that when we change our physical state—through movement or relaxation, for example—we can change our emotional state. Try smiling for a minute—it can make you feel happier; quick, shallow breaths accompany anxiety, and if you take a slow, deep breath, you’ll likely feel calmer. (You can try these little exercises with your child to teach her how her body affects how she feels.) The body is full of information that it sends to the brain. In fact, a lot of the emotion we feel actually begins in the body. Our churning stomach and tense shoulders send physical messages of anxiety to the brain before we even consciously realize that we’re nervous. The flow of energy and information from the body up into our brain stem, into our limbic region, and then up into the cortex, changes our bodily states, our emotional states, and our thoughts. What happened for Liam, then, was that the movement of his body helped bring his whole self into a state of integration, so his upstairs brain, his downstairs brain, and his body could all once again do their jobs in a way that was effective and healthy. When he felt overwhelmed, the flow of energy and information became blocked, resulting in dis-integration. Vigorously moving his body released some of his angry energy and tension, allowing him to relax. So after his run, his body sent “calmer” information to his upstairs brain, meaning that his emotional balance returned and the different parts of his brain and body began to function again in an integrated way. The next time your children need help calming down or regaining control, look for ways to get them moving. For young kids, experiment with what might be called creative, loving trickery, as shown on this page.

>But don’t forget: parenting crises are openings for growth and integration. You can use the moments when you feel yourself losing control as opportunities to model self-regulation. Little eyes are watching to see how you calm yourself down. Your actions set an example of how to make a good choice in a high-emotion moment when you’re in danger of flipping your lid.

>So what do you do when you recognize that your downstairs brain has taken over and you’ve begun to lose your mind? First, do no harm. Close your mouth to avoid saying something you’ll regret. Put your hands behind your back to avoid any kind of rough physical contact. When you’re in a downstairs moment, protect your child at all costs.

>Finally, repair. Quickly. Reconnect with your child as soon as you are calm and feeling more in control of yourself. Then deal with whatever emotional and relational harm has been done. This may involve your expressing forgiveness, but it may also require that you apologize and accept responsibility for your own actions. This step needs to occur as quickly as possible. The sooner you repair the connection between yourself and your child, the sooner you can both regain your emotional balance and get back to enjoying your relationship together.

>Notice that the main thing Tina did here was to tell the story of where her son’s fears came from. She used narrative to help his implicit memories become explicit and full of meaning, so they wouldn’t act on him with such hidden power. Once his implicit memories about the unpleasant swimming lessons were brought into the light of awareness, he could pretty easily deal with his present-day fears. It’s in this transformation—from implicit to explicit—that the real power of integrating memory brings insight, understanding, and even healing.

>INTEGRATING IMPLICIT AND EXPLICIT: ASSEMBLING THE PUZZLE PIECES OF THE MIND Implicit memories are often positive and work in our favor, like when we fully expect to be loved by those around us simply because we’ve always been loved. If we count on our parents to comfort us when we’re hurting, since they’ve always done so before, that’s because a host of positive implicit memories have been stored up within us. But implicit memories can be negative as well, like when we’ve repeatedly had the opposite experience of our parents being irritated by or uninterested in our times of distress. The problem with an implicit memory, especially of a painful or negative experience, is that when we aren’t aware of it, it becomes a buried land mine that can limit us in significant and sometimes debilitating ways. The brain remembers many events whether we’re aware of them or not, so when we have difficult experiences—anything from a twisted ankle to the death of someone we love—these painful moments get embedded in the brain and begin to affect us. Even though we’re not aware of their origins in the past, implicit memories can still create fear, avoidance, sadness, and other painful emotions and bodily sensations. That helps explain why children (as well as adults) often react strongly to situations without being aware of why they are so upset. Unless kids can make sense of their painful memories, they may experience sleep disturbances, debilitating phobias, and other problems. So how do we help our children when they’re suffering from the effects of past negative experiences? We shine the light of awareness on those implicit memories, making them explicit so that our child can become aware of them and deal with them in an intentional way. Sometimes parents hope that their children will “just forget about” painful experiences they’ve undergone, but what kids really need is for parents to teach them healthy ways to integrate implicit and explicit memories, turning even painful experiences into sources of power and self-understanding.

>There’s a part of our brain whose very job is to do just that: to integrate our implicit and explicit memories, so that we can more fully understand the world and ourselves. It’s called the hippocampus, and it can be considered the “search engine” of memory retrieval. The hippocampus works with different parts of our brain to take all of the images, emotions, and sensations of implicit memory and draw them together so that they can become the assembled “pictures” that make up our explicit understanding of our past experiences. Think of the hippocampus as a master puzzle assembler that links together the jigsaw pieces of implicit memory. When the images and sensations of experience remain in implicit-only form, when they haven’t been integrated by the hippocampus, they exist in isolation from one another as a jumbled mess in our brain. Instead of having a clear and whole picture, a completed jigsaw puzzle, our implicit memories remain scattered puzzle pieces. We therefore lack clarity about our own unfolding narrative, which explicitly defines who we are. What’s worse, these implicit-only memories continue to shape the way we look at and interact with our here-and-now reality. They affect the sense of who we are from moment to moment—all without our even being aware that they are affecting the way we interact with our world. It’s crucial, therefore, that we assemble these implicit puzzle pieces into explicit form in order to be able to reflect on their impact on our lives. That’s where the hippocampus comes in. By performing the important function of integrating implicit and explicit memories, it allows us to become the active authors of our own life stories. When Tina talked to her son about his fearful associations with swim lessons, she was simply helping his hippocampus do its job. It didn’t take much for his implicit memories to become explicit, so that he could handle his fear and make sense of both his painful experience in the past and how it was still affecting him in the present. When we don’t offer a place for children to express their feelings and recall what happened after an overwhelming event, their implicit-only memories remain in dis-integrated form, leaving the children with no way to make sense of their experience. But when we help our kids integrate their past into their present, they can then make sense of what’s going on inside them and gain control over how they think and behave. The more you promote this type of memory integration in your child, the less often you will see irrational responses to what’s happening now that are really leftover reactions from the past.

>Whole-Brain Strategy #7: Remember to Remember: Making Recollection a Part of Your Family’s Daily Life

>Whole-Brain Strategy #7: Remember to Remember: Making Recollection a Part of Your Family’s Daily Life The act of remembering comes naturally for most people. But memory is like so many functions of the brain: the more we exercise it, the stronger it becomes. That means that when you give your children lots of practice at remembering—by having them tell and retell their own stories—you improve their ability to integrate implicit and explicit memories. So our second suggestion is simply that you remember to remember. During your various activities, help your kids talk about their experiences, so they can integrate their implicit and explicit memories. This is especially important when it comes to the most important and valuable moments of their lives. The more you can help bring those noteworthy moments into their explicit memory—such as family experiences, important friendships, or rites of passage—then the clearer and more influential those experiences will be.

>Whole-Brain Strategy #8: Let the Clouds of Emotion Roll By: Teaching That Feelings Come and Go

>Whole-Brain Strategy #8: Let the Clouds of Emotions Roll By: Teaching That Feelings Come and Go As we’ve said repeatedly in our journey through this book, it’s very important that kids learn about and understand their feelings. But it’s also true that feelings need to be recognized for what they are: temporary, changing conditions. They are states, not traits. They’re like the weather. Rain is real, and we’d be foolish to stand in a downpour and act as if it weren’t actually raining. But we’d be just as foolish to expect that the sun will never reappear.

>The key is that mirror neurons respond only to an act with intention, where there’s some predictability or purpose that can be perceived. For example, if someone simply waves her hand in the air randomly, your mirror neurons won’t respond. But if that person carries out an act you can predict from experience, like taking a drink from a cup of water, your mirror neurons will “figure out” what’s intended before the person does it. So when she lifts up her hand with a cup in it, you can predict at a synaptic level that she intends to drink from it. Not only that, the mirror neurons in your own upstairs brain will get you ready to drink as well. We see an act, we understand the purpose of the act, and we ready ourselves to mirror it. At the simplest level, that’s why we get thirsty when others drink, and why we yawn when others yawn. It may be why even a newborn infant, just a few hours old, can mimic his parents when he sticks out his tongue. Mirror neurons may also explain why younger siblings are sometimes better at sports. Before they ever join their own team, their mirror neurons have fired each of the hundreds of times they’ve watched their older siblings hit, kick, and throw a ball. At the most complex level, mirror neurons help us understand the nature of culture and how our shared behaviors bind us together, child to parent, friend to friend, and eventually spouse to spouse.

>Whole-Brain Strategy #12: Connect Through Conflict: Teach Kids to Argue with a “We” in Mind

>The most important “we” in your life as a parent is the relationship you share with your child. That relationship significantly impacts your child’s future. Research studies have consistently shown that when parents offer repeated, predictable experiences in which they see and sensitively respond to their children’s emotions and needs, their children will thrive—socially, emotionally, physically, and even academically. While it’s not exactly a revelation that kids do better when they enjoy strong relationships with their parents, what may surprise you is what produces this kind of parent-child connection. It’s not how our parents raised us, or how many parenting books we’ve read. It’s actually how well we’ve made sense of our experiences with our own parents and how sensitive we are to our children that most powerfully influence our relationship with our kids, and therefore how well they thrive. It all comes down to what we call our life narrative, the story we tell when we look at who we are and how we’ve become the person that we are. Our life narrative determines our feelings about our past, our understanding of why people (like our parents) behaved as they did, and our awareness of the way those events have impacted our development into adulthood. When we have a coherent life narrative, we have made sense of how the past has contributed to who we are and what we do.

>INTEGRATING THE LEFT AND RIGHT BRAIN• Left + right = clarity and understanding: Help your kids use both the logical left brain and the emotional right brain as a team.• What you can do: • Connect and redirect: When your child is upset, connect first emotionally, right brain to right brain. Then, once your child is more in control and receptive, bring in the left-brain lessons and discipline. • Name it to tame it: When big, right-brain emotions are raging out of control, help your kids tell the story about what’s upsetting them, so their left brain can help make sense of their experience and they can feel more in control.

>Infant/Toddler (0–3) TYPE OF INTEGRATION Integrating the Left and Right Brain WHOLE-BRAIN STRATEGY #1: Connect and redirect: When your child is upset, connect first emotionally, right brain to right brain. Then, once she is more in control and receptive, bring in the left-brain lessons and discipline. APPLICATIONS OF THE STRATEGY Now is the time, as early as possible, to begin teaching your child about emotions. Mirror feelings and use nonverbals (like hugs and empathetic facial expressions) to show that you understand: You’re frustrated, aren’t you? Then, once you’ve connected, set the boundary: Biting hurts. Please be gentle. Finally, focus on an appropriate alternative or move on to something else: Hey, there’s your bear. I haven’t seen him in a long time. WHOLE-BRAIN STRATEGY #2: Name it to tame it: When big, right-brain emotions are raging out of control, help your child tell the story about what’s upsetting him. In doing so, he’ll use his left brain to make sense of his experience and feel more in control. APPLICATIONS OF THE STRATEGY Even at this young age, make it a habit to acknowledge and name feelings: You look so sad. That really hurt, didn’t it? Then tell the story. With small children, you’ll need to be the primary narrator. Use your words and even act out the fall or the bump, possibly using humor, and watch your child’s fascination.

>TYPE OF INTEGRATION Integrating the Upstairs and Downstairs WHOLE-BRAIN STRATEGY #3: Engage, don’t enrage: In high-stress situations, engage your child’s upstairs brain by asking her to consider and plan and choose, rather than triggering her downstairs brain, which is less about thinking and more about reacting. APPLICATIONS OF THE STRATEGY Nobody likes to be told no, and it’s an especially ineffective strategy to use too often with toddlers. When possible, avoid outright power struggles with your little one. Save your no for when you really need it. The next time you hear yourself beginning to forbid her from hitting the mirror with the stick, stop. Instead, engage her upstairs brain: Let’s go outside. What could you do with that stick in the yard? WHOLE-BRAIN STRATEGY #4: Use it or lose it: Provide lots of opportunities to exercise the upstairs brain so it can be strong and integrated with the downstairs brain and the body. APPLICATIONS OF THE STRATEGY As often as possible, find ways to let your child use her upstairs brain and make decisions for herself. Do you want to wear your blue or red shirt today? Would you like milk or water with dinner? When you read together, ask brain-growing questions: How do you think the kitty will get down from the tree? Why does the girl look sad?

>TYPE OF INTEGRATION Integrating the Upstairs and Downstairs WHOLE-BRAIN STRATEGY #5: Move it or lose it: A powerful way to help a child regain upstairs-downstairs balance is to have him move his body. APPLICATIONS OF THE STRATEGY When your child is upset, make sure to acknowledge his feelings. This should always be your first move. But then, as quickly as possible, get him moving. Roughhouse with him. Play follow the leader. Race him to his bedroom and back. Get him to move and you’ll change his mood.

>WHOLE-BRAIN STRATEGY #10: Exercise mindsight: Mindsight practices teach children to calm themselves and focus their attention where they want. APPLICATIONS OF THE STRATEGY Even small children can learn to be still and take calm breaths, if only for a few seconds. Have your child lie on her back and place a toy boat on her stomach. Show her how to take slow, big breaths to make the boat go up and down. Keep this exercise very short since she’s so young. Just let her experience the feeling of being still, quiet, and peaceful.

>Preschooler (3–6) TYPE OF INTEGRATION Integrating the Left and Right Brain WHOLE-BRAIN STRATEGY #1: Connect and redirect: When your child is upset, connect first emotionally, right brain to right brain. Then, once she is more in control and receptive, bring in the left-brain lessons and discipline. APPLICATIONS OF THE STRATEGY First, lovingly hear what’s upset your child. Hug her and repeat back to her what you’ve heard with nurturing nonverbal communication: You’re really disappointed that Molly can’t come over? Then, once you’ve connected, help direct her toward problem solving and more appropriate behavior: I know you’re upset, but you need to be gentle with Mommy. Do you have another idea for playing? Maybe we could see if Molly can come over tomorrow.

>TYPE OF INTEGRATION Integrating the Upstairs and Downstairs WHOLE-BRAIN STRATEGY #3: Engage, don’t enrage: In high-stress situations, engage your child’s upstairs brain by asking her to consider and plan and choose, rather than triggering her downstairs brain, which is less about thinking and more about reacting. APPLICATIONS OF THE STRATEGY Setting clear boundaries is important, but we often say no more than we need to. When your child is upset, be creative. Instead of saying, We don’t act that way, ask, What’s another way you could handle that? Instead of I don’t like the way you’re talking, try, Can you think of another way to say that, one that will be more polite? Then praise her when she uses her upstairs brain to come up with alternatives. A great question to help avoid power struggles is, Can you come up with an idea for how we can both get what we want?

>WHOLE-BRAIN STRATEGY #5: Move it or lose it: A powerful way to help a child regain upstairs-downstairs balance is to have him move his body. APPLICATIONS OF THE STRATEGY Kids this age love to move. So when your child is upset, and after you’ve acknowledged his feelings, give him reasons to move his body. Wrestle with him. Play “keep it up” with a balloon. Toss a ball back and forth while he’s telling you why he’s upset. Moving the body is a powerful way to change a mood.

>TYPE OF INTEGRATION Integrating the Many Parts of Myself WHOLE-BRAIN STRATEGY #8: Let the clouds of emotion roll by: Remind kids that feelings come and go. Fear, frustration, and loneliness are temporary states, not enduring traits. APPLICATIONS OF THE STRATEGY One reason big feelings can be so uncomfortable for small children is that they don’t view those emotions as temporary. So while you comfort your child when she’s upset, teach her that feelings come and go. Help her see that it’s good to acknowledge her emotions, but it’s also good to realize that even though she’s sad (or angry or scared) right now, she’ll probably be happy again in a few minutes. You can even “lead the witness” and ask, When do you think you’ll feel better?

>Early School Age (6–9)

>TYPE OF INTEGRATION Integrating the Upstairs and Downstairs WHOLE-BRAIN STRATEGY #3: Engage, don’t enrage: In high-stress situations, engage your child’s upstairs brain by asking her to consider and plan and choose, rather than triggering her downstairs brain, which is less about thinking and more about reacting. APPLICATIONS OF THE STRATEGY As always, connect first. Avoid immediately playing the “Because I said so!” card. Your child’s upstairs brain is blossoming right now, so let it do its job. Explain your reasons, invite questions, ask for alternative solutions, and even negotiate. You’re the authority in the relationship, and there’s no place for disrespect, but you can encourage your child to come up with different approaches to discipline or learning a lesson. When we expect and facilitate more sophisticated thinking, we’re less likely to get a reactive, fighting response.

>TYPE OF INTEGRATION Integrating the Many Parts of Myself WHOLE-BRAIN STRATEGY #8: Let the clouds of emotion roll by: Remind kids that feelings come and go. Fear, frustration, and loneliness are temporary states, not enduring traits. APPLICATIONS OF THE STRATEGY Help your child pay attention to the words he uses when he talks about his feelings. There’s nothing wrong with saying, “I’m scared.” But help him understand that another way to say it is, “I feel scared.” This minor shift in vocabulary can help him understand the subtle but important distinction between “feel” and “am.” He may feel afraid in the moment, but that experience is temporary, not permanent. To give him perspective, ask him how he expects to feel in five minutes, five hours, five days, five months, and five years. WHOLE-BRAIN STRATEGY #9: SIFT: Help your children notice and understand the sensations, images, feelings, and thoughts within them. APPLICATIONS OF THE STRATEGY Introduce the wheel of awareness. Also, play the SIFT game in the car or at dinner and actually teach your child the acronym. Help her understand that we need to notice what’s going on within ourselves if we want to control the way we feel and act. Ask questions that guide her toward noticing bodily sensations (Are you hungry?), mental images (What do you picture when you think about Grandma’s house?), feelings (It’s not fun to feel left out, is it?), and thoughts (What do you think will happen at school tomorrow?). TYPE OF INTEGRATION Integrating the Many Parts of Myself WHOLE-BRAIN STRATEGY #10: Exercise mindsight: Mindsight practices teach children to calm themselves and focus their attention where they want. APPLICATIONS OF THE STRATEGY Children this age can understand and feel the benefits of getting calm and focusing the mind. Give them practice at being still and quiet, and let them enjoy the calm within. By guiding their mind through visualization and imagination, show them that they have the ability to focus their attention on thoughts and feelings that bring them happiness and peace. Show them that anytime they need to calm themselves, they can simply slow down and pay attention to their breathing.

>WHOLE-BRAIN STRATEGY #12: Connect through conflict: Rather than an obstacle to avoid, view conflict as an opportunity to teach your kids essential relationship skills. APPLICATIONS OF THE STRATEGY Your child is old enough now for more relational sophistication. Explicitly teach a skill, then practice it. Explain about seeing other people’s perspectives, then pick out random people in a store or restaurant and try to guess what’s important to them and where they’re coming from. Teach about reading nonverbal cues, then play a game to see how many examples (frowning, shrugging, lifting eyebrows, etc.) you can come up with. Teach about going beyond apologizing when we’ve messed up, then come up with a timely example where your child can put it into practice by writing a letter or replacing something important.