# Your Money or Your Life
Authors: Vicki Robin and Joe Dominguez  
[Amazon](https://amzn.to/2UPCD2s)  
[Goodreads](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/49807173-your-money-or-your-life)  

>MANAGING YOUR LIFE AS AN INTEGRATED WHOLE Many books on money are available today. Books on the philosophy of money. Books on the psychology of money. Books on home accounting and budgeting. Books on how to earn money. Books on how to save money. Books on how to invest the money you’ve earned and saved. Books on how your spending affects the environment. Books on how to get rich. Books on how to file for bankruptcy. Books on how to retire. What these books have in common is that they assume that your financial life functions separately from the rest of your life. This book is about putting it all back together. It is about integration, a “whole systems” approach to life. It will take you back to basics—the basics of making your spending (and hopefully your saving) of money into a clear mirror of your life values and purpose. It is about the most basic of freedoms—the freedom to think for yourself.

>The Not-So-Merry Money-Go-Round Once upon a time “earning a living” was the means to an end. The means was “earning”; the end was “living.” Over time our relationship with money—earning it, spending it, investing it, owing it, protecting it, worrying about it—has taken over the major part of our lives. Most of us spend much more than 40 hours out of the week’s total of 168 hours earning money. We must take time to dress for our jobs, commute to our jobs, think about our jobs at work and at home, “decompress” from our jobs. We must spend our evenings and weekends in mindless “escape entertainment” in order to “recreate” from our jobs. We must occasionally “vacate” our jobs, or spend time at the doctor’s office to repair our job-stressed health. We need to plan our “careers,” attend job seminars or union meetings, lobby or picket for our jobs. We must spend money to maintain our jobs—job costuming, commuting costs, food bought expensively at the workplace. We must spend so that our neighborhood, house, car, lifestyle and even life mate reflect our “position” in the work world. With all that time and money spent on and around our jobs, is it any wonder that we have come to take our identities from them? When asked, “What do you do?” we don’t say, “I do plumbing.” We say, “I am a plumber.”

>Our old financial map, instead of making us more independent, fulfilled individuals, has led us into a web of financial dependencies; our lives are so woven into the fabric of the economy that many of us no longer have the other kinds of wealth to fall back on—close knit families and communities, growing our own food, knowing how to make and fix the tools of daily life. The old road map has hit the end of the road. The material progress that was supposed to free us has left us more enslaved.

>“Your money or your life.” If someone thrust a gun in your ribs and said that sentence, what would you do? Most of us would turn over our wallets. The threat works because we value our lives more than we value our money. Or do we?

>The people you’ll be hearing about in this book have found that there is another way. There is a way to live an authentic, productive, meaningful life—and have all the material comforts you want or need. There is a way to balance your inner and outer lives, to have your job self be on good terms with your family self and your deeper self. There is a way to go about the task of making a living so that you end up more alive. There is a way to approach life so that when asked, “Your money or your life?” you say, “I’ll take both, thank you.” We Aren’t Making a Living, We’re Making a Dying For so many working people, however, from people who love their work to those who barely tolerate their jobs, there seems to be no real choice between their money and their lives. What they do for money dominates their waking hours, and life is what can be fit into the scant remaining time. Consider the average worker in almost any urban industrialized city. The alarm rings at 6:45 and our working man or woman is up and running. Shower. Dress in the professional uniform—suits or dresses for some, coveralls for others, whites for the medical professionals, jeans and flannel shirts for construction workers. Breakfast, if there’s time. Grab commuter mug and briefcase (or lunch box). Hop in the car for the daily punishment called rush hour or on a bus or train packed crushingly tight. On the job from nine to five. Deal with the boss. Deal with the coworker sent by the devil to rub you the wrong way. Deal with suppliers. Deal with clients/customers/patients. Act busy. Hide mistakes. Smile when handed impossible deadlines. Give a sigh of relief when the ax known as “restructuring” or “downsizing”—or just plain getting laid off—falls on other heads. Shoulder the added workload. Watch the clock. Argue with your conscience but agree with the boss. Smile again. Five o’clock. Back in the car and onto the freeway or into the bus or train for the evening commute. Home. Act human with mates, kids or roommates. Eat. Watch TV. Bed. Eight hours of blessed oblivion.

>The Fulfillment Curve The Fulfillment Curve (see Figure 1-2) shows the relationship between the experience of fulfillment and the amount of money we spend (usually to acquire more possessions). In the beginning of our lives, more possessions did indeed mean more fulfillment. Basic needs were met. We were fed. We were warm. We were sheltered. Most of us don’t remember the fear of hunger and cold that was remedied by just a blanket and a breast—but we all went through it. When we were uncomfortable, when we cried, something came from the outside to take care of us. It seemed like magic. Our needs were filled. We survived. Our minds recorded each such incident and remembered: look outside yourself and you will be fulfilled. We then went from bare necessities (food, clothing, shelter) to some amenities (toys, a wardrobe, a bicycle), and the positive relationship between money and fulfillment became even more deeply embedded. Remember your excitement as a child when you got a toy you’d been dying for? If our parents were being responsible, they soon taught us, “Those things cost money, dear. Money that we go out and earn for you—because we love you.” We got an allowance to learn the value of money. We could select and purchase happiness ourselves! And so it went, year after year. There was the prom tux and corsage. The tennis racket. Eventually we slipped beyond amenities to outright luxuries—and hardly registered the change. A car, for example, is a luxury that the vast majority of the world’s population never enjoys. For us, however, our first car is the beginning of a lifelong love affair with the automobile. Then there’s the luxury of our first trip away from home. For many of us, there was going away to college. Our first apartment. Notice that while each one was still a thrill, it cost more per thrill and the “high” wore off more quickly. FIGURE 1-2 Evolution of the Fulfillment Curve But by now we believed that money equals fulfillment, so we barely noticed that the curve had started to level out. On we went into life. House. Job. Family responsibilities. More money brought more worry. More time and energy commitments as we rose up the corporate ladder. More time away from the family. More to lose if we were robbed, so more worry about being robbed. More taxes and more tax accountants’ fees. More demands from community charities. Therapists’ bills. Remodeling bills. Just-keeping-the-kids-happy bills. Until one day we found ourselves sitting, unfulfilled, in our big home on two and a half wooded acres with a three-car garage and expensive exercise equipment in the basement, yearning for the life we had as poor college students who could find joy in a walk in the park. We hit a fulfillment ceiling and never recognized that the formula of money = fulfillment not only had stopped working but had started to work against us. No matter how much we bought, the Fulfillment Curve kept heading down. Enough—The Peak of the Curve There’s a very interesting place on this graph—it’s the peak. Part of the secret to life, it would seem, comes from identifying for yourself that point of maximum fulfillment. There is a name for this peak of the Fulfillment Curve, and it provides the basis for transforming your relationship with money. It’s a word we use every day, yet we are practically incapable of recognizing it when it’s staring us in the face. The word is “enough.” At the peak of the Fulfillment Curve we have enough (see Figure 1-3). Enough for our survival. Enough comforts. And even enough little “luxuries.” We have everything we need; there’s nothing extra to weigh us down, distract or distress us, nothing we’ve bought on time, have never used and are slaving to pay off. Enough is a fearless place. A trusting place. An honest and self-observant place. It’s appreciating and fully enjoying what money brings into your life and yet never purchasing anything that isn’t needed and wanted. FIGURE 1-3 The Fulfillment Curve: Enough Once you have discovered what is enough for you, your Fulfillment Curve can reverse direction and head straight up. Stay tuned.

>What, then, is the way out? What is the one consistently true statement we can make about money that will allow us to be clear, masterful and powerful in our relationship with it? Money is something we choose to trade our life energy for. We will repeat this because you may have missed its full significance: Money is something we choose to trade our life energy for. Our life energy is our allotment of time here on Earth, the hours of precious life available to us. When we go to our jobs we are trading our life energy for money. This truth, while simple, is profound. Less obvious but equally true, when we go to the welfare office, we are trading our life energy for money. When we go to a gambling casino, we are trading our life energy for money (we hope). Even windfalls like inheritances must in some way be “earned” to actually belong to the heir—life energy must be exchanged. Time is spent with lawyers, accountants, trustees, brokers and investment counselors to handle the money. Or time is spent in therapy working out the relationship with the deceased or the guilt at receiving all that money. Or time is spent investigating worthy causes to fund. All this is life energy traded for money. This definition of money gives us significant information. Our life energy is more real in our actual experience than money. You could even say money equals our life energy. So, while money has no intrinsic reality, our life energy does—at least to us. It’s tangible, and it’s finite. Life energy is all we have. It is precious because it is limited and irretrievable and because our choices about how we use it express the meaning and purpose of our time here on Earth.

>HOW MUCH IS ENOUGH? THE NATURE OF FULFILLMENT What is fulfillment? Whether in the sense of accomplishing a goal or enjoying a moment of real contentment, fulfillment is that experience of deep satisfaction when you can say, Aaahh . . . that was a delicious meal, a job well done or a purchase worth the money. To find fulfillment, though, you need to know what you are looking for. It’s fairly easy to know what fulfillment is in terms of food or other temporary pleasures. But to have fulfillment in the larger sense, to have a fulfilled life, you need to have a sense of purpose, a dream of what a good life might be.

>Indulge yourself now. Stare out a window. Shut your eyes. And envision what would be a truly fulfilling life for you. To help you get started on this journey, ask yourself the following questions: ◆What did you want to be when you grew up? ◆What have you always wanted to do that you haven’t yet done? ◆What have you done in your life that you are really proud of? ◆If you knew you were going to die within a year, how would you spend that year? ◆What brings you the most fulfillment—and how is that related to money? ◆If you didn’t have to work for a living, what would you do with your time?

>The primary tool for developing this internal yardstick is awareness. The affluence that surrounds us has been called the American Dream, and with good reason: we’ve been asleep. We wake up by questioning the dream. Asking yourself, month in, month out, whether you actually got fulfillment in proportion to life energy spent in each subcategory awakens that natural sense of knowing when enough is enough. You come to differentiate between a passing fancy and real fulfillment, that point of perfect balance where desires disappear because they have been completely met. Any less would be not enough. Any more would be too much. A fulfilling meal is one where all the flavors, smells and textures blend perfectly and your appetite is satisfied without even a trace of the discomfort of having overeaten. In the same way, a fulfilling car is one that meets your transportation needs perfectly, that is pleasing enough to the eye, that you will enjoy owning for many thousands of miles, that doesn’t insult your wallet or your values and that, with good maintenance, will be both reliable and a pleasure to drive. Your internal yardstick would dismiss any superficial desires to impress others, to relieve the boredom of driving a two-year-old car, to own a Lexus because you want the status symbol or to have a blue convertible that matches your eyes. Those are all external yardsticks. If an experience or a purchase is truly fulfilling, the desire disappears for a long time. You are satisfied, contented, at peace.

>ou learn quite a lot about the values you are living when you look at your Monthly Tabulations. What values do the $150 (or 25 hours of life energy, at the $6 per hour we calculated in our example in Chapter 2) spent on eating out reveal? They could indicate any number of things: that you value convenience, that you like good food or that you want social time with friends. What about the 12 hours donated to a charity? The 30 hours for the phone bill? You may find that you are comfortable with many of these expenditures. And some you may question. Twenty-five hours of life energy spent on eating out may seem fine—until you realize upon reflection that you devoted only eight hours this month to one of your children. For many people, the values expressed in their expenditures are not the values they really want to be living. Your totals in some of your categories may reveal that habit, peer pressure or even boredom has gotten the best of you. Go back to the questions at the beginning of the chapter. If you didn’t have to work for a living, what would you do with your time? What have you done with your life that you are really proud of? How would you spend the next year if you knew it was the last year of your life? Your answers to these questions will tell you a lot about what you truly value.

>How Do We Find Our Purpose? Joanna Macy, an educator, ecologist and author, has suggested three directions in which to look for your own purpose .2 1. Work with your passion, on projects you care deeply about. What was your dream before you stopped dreaming? What’s the work you would do even if you weren’t paid to do it? You’re not looking for those superficial preferences depicted on bumper stickers, like “I’d rather be surfing.” You’re looking for something you’d gladly no-holds-barred would give your life to, not something you use to get away from your life.

>Measuring Our Movement Toward Purpose Once again, go back to the questions at the beginning of this chapter. What have you always wanted to do that you haven’t done yet? What brings you the most fulfillment? Your musings in response to these questions will also provide clues to your purpose.

>How did frugality lose favor among Americans? It is, after all, a perennial ideal and a cornerstone of the American character. Both Socrates and Plato praised the “golden mean.” Both the Old Testament (“Give me neither poverty nor wealth, but only enough”) and the teachings of Jesus (“Ye cannot serve both God and money”) extol the value of material simplicity in enriching the life of the spirit. In American history well-known individuals (Benjamin Franklin, Henry David Thoreau, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Robert Frost) as well as groups (Amish, Quakers, Hutterites, Mennonites) have carried forward the virtue of thrift—both out of respect for the earth and out of a thirst for a touch of heaven. And the challenges of building our nation required frugality of most of our citizens. Indeed, the wealth we enjoy today is the result of centuries of frugality.

>We looked up “frugal” in a Merriam-Webster dictionary and found “characterized by or reflecting economy in the expenditure of resources.” That sounds about right—a serviceable, practical and fairly colorless word. None of the elegance or grace of the “enoughness” that FIers experience. But when we dig deeper, the dictionary tells us that “frugal” shares a Latin root with frug (meaning virtue), frux (meaning fruit or value) and frui (meaning to enjoy or have the use of). Now we’re talking ! Frugality is enjoying the virtue of getting good value for every minute of your life energy and from everything you have the use of.

>Frugality is the balance we seek. Frugality is the Greek notion of the golden mean. Frugality is being efficient in harvesting happiness from the world you live in. Frugality is right-use (which sounds, appropriately, like “righteous”)—the wise stewarding of money, time, energy, space and possessions. Goldilocks expressed it well when she declared the porridge “not too hot, not too cold, but just right.” Frugality is something like that—not too much, not too little, but just right. Nothing is wasted. Or left unused. It’s a clean machine. Sleek. Perfect. Simple yet elegant. It’s that magic word—enough. The peak of the Fulfillment Curve. The jumping-off point for a life of being fulfilled, learning and contributing to the welfare of the planet. Keep this in mind as we explore ways to save money. We aren’t talking about being cheap, making do or being a skinflint or a tightwad. We’re talking about creative frugality, a way of life in which you get the maximum fulfillment for each unit of life energy spent. In fact, now that you know that money is your life energy, it seems foolish to consider wasting it on stuff you don’t enjoy and never use. Recalling the arithmetic we did in Chapter 2, you’ll remember that if you are forty years old, actuarial tables indicate that you have just 349,763 hours of life energy in your bank. That may seem like a lot now, but those hours will feel very precious at the end of your life. Spend them well now and you won’t have regrets later.